Short memos are designed to help you practice making and defending arguments.  They should be written in the form of a background memo, where you are explaining something that your stakeholder needs to know.   A stakeholder is a real organization with a website (please link the website to the first mention of your stakeholder).  Choose a stakeholder who will care about the topic of your memo, and explain why it is important (see paragraph 1).

You can build on your extra credit posts to write your short memos, but you are not required to.

Executive summary:  One or two sentences that summarize the memo.  Although it appears first in the memo, write it last after you are happy with the memo.  The memo should stand alone without the summary; do not use the executive summary to include facts or background that do not appear in the memo itself.

[REVISE WHEN DONE] This short brief will explain how COBs are structured, explore some cases in which they have been effective, and discuss some of the criticisms and failures of COBs.

Paragraph 1:  Introduce the topic of the memo and explain why it is important to your stakeholder.  You can choose any stakeholder in your country, including both government and non-governmental groups, as long as that stakeholder is able to make use of the institution.

In light of increasing police violence [Consider changing to: In the fight to confront police violence, racism, etc], it crucial that local [stakeholders] understand the various methods of excercizing police oversight. One increasingly popular method is the Civilian Oversight Board (COB), also called Civilian Accountability or Review Boards. There are over 18,000 police departments in the United States, and unlike in other countries, there is no central agency or department that oversees their practices or misconduct[^1]. Due to the separation of powers between federal, state and local governments embodied in the Tenth Amendment of the US Constitution, the federal government and state governments exercise only very specific oversight over municipal police departments. In this environment, many local governments have turned to COBs to provide oversight and accountability for their police departments. Most Boards are made up of non-police civilians, and are organized in one of three ways[^2]:
-  Investigation focused models conduct independent investigations of complaints against individual police officers.
-  Auditor/Monitor models review police investigations and conduct to make recommendations regarding policy and training.
-  Review focused models hear and collect community input on police practices and make recommendations to the police department.
These categories are not strictly defined, and many COBs have a combine aspects of each model. [Example of a COB structured to fulfill multiple aims, maybe NYPD CRB].

Paragraph 2:  Explain how your stakeholder can make use of the institution in question, with at least one example.  (You may have identified this example in your extra credit post.)

[Stakeholder] should consider advocating for legislation that mandates the establishment of COBs in all municipalities which have a police department. In considering drafting legislation or advocating for the establishment of a COB, [stakeholder] must ensure that the COB is structured in a way that ensures independence, access, and authority to accomplish their goals. Research has established that COBs are most effective when they are adequately funded, allowed full access to records, and supported by the community[^3]. For example, [...]

Paragraph 3: Consider a counter-argument – a reason why using this institution may not help you achieve your goal – with an example.  (You may have identified this example in your extra credit post as well.)  Then explain why, despite the counter-argument, you still believe that this institution can be useful to you.  You do not need a separate conclusion.

[Any stakeholder] pressing for widespread adoption of COBs should be aware of the criticisms of these types of boards. Many COBs lack the authority to enforce discipline on officers, or directly modify police department policies. After an investigation or review, these boards will normally issue a report with recommendations, which the chief of the department can either accept or reject[^4]. Police union agreements can also introduce complications, as many union contracts require arbitration for any changes that "affect police working conditions," which can include changes to disciplinary procedures or oversight[^5]. These limitations have hindered the effectiveness of COBs in many cities. In [example], 

Remember to cite your sources!  A full cite includes BOTH a web link (if one exists) and author, title, date, and source information.  Do not just provide a link without additional information about the source.  Wikipedia is not an acceptable source (confirm info on Wikipedia with the sources cited by the article, or other information you locate on your own).  Chat GPT is not a source either, especially because it tends to "hallucinate" (to make statements that are not true).


[^1]: Sweden has a single national force controlled by the government. England and Wales have larger regional forces. For more information on international comparisons, see ["How Police Compare in Different Democracies"](https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/how-police-compare-different-democracies). Council on Foreign Relations. 2022.
[^2]: Joseph De Angelis, Richard Rosenthal, Brian Buchner (2016). ["Civilian Oversight of Law Enforcement: Assessing the Evidence"](https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/nacole/pages/161/attachments/original/1481727974/NACOLE_AccessingtheEvidence_Final.pdf?1481727974). Booz Allen Hamilton.
[^3]: Joseph De Angelis, Richard Rosenthal, Brian Buchner (2016). ["Civilian Oversight of Law Enforcement: A Review of the Strengths and Weaknesses of Various Models"](https://samuelwalker.net/wp-content/uploads/2010/06/NACOLEStrengthsWeaknesses.pdf).
[^4]: Clarke, S. (2009), [“Arrested oversight: a comparative analysis and case study of how civilian oversight of the police should function and how it fails”](https://jlsp.law.columbia.edu/wp-content/blogs.dir/213/files/2017/03/43-Clarke.pdf), Columbia Journal of Law and Social Problems, Vol. 43 No. 1, pp. 1-49
[^5]: Hopkins, J. S., & Villanueva, K. (2020, June 11). ["The Long Battle for Civilian Oversight of the Police"](https://publicintegrity.org/inequality-poverty-opportunity/the-long-battle-for-civilian-oversight-of-the-police/). Center for Public Integrity.