## last class!

### recap on community policing
issue of equity
- community input into policing
- concern i swhen police priorities are set by the community it matters who serves as a proxy or representative for the community
- how those voices are incorporated

e.g. when white homeowners are the only ones who shows up to the community meetings there is a problem.
- another problem is when we ask laypeople what the police should do, full stop, and not just for input on the matter without subject matter expertise to give context to the issue.

- just asking the community what the policy should be might be the wrong question to ask.
-- give the public context and take what they say seriously

both community policing model and democratic policing model face these issues
- danger is when police have community meetings and just hope for the best
- good community policing program has to work hard for the police to reach out to those most affected by the decisions, that they craft the dialogue and the questions in the right way so that they can have productive conversations with the community, and that they can ensure that public comment is incorporated into policing practices.
- this require professionals like trained facilitators and resources, not just desk police officers
- requires significant investment

## course recap 

### themes related to democratic theory 
- this class is about the external control of police orgs -- the way that authority over policing is distributed across a wide range of institutions and not just policing itself 
- that is a feature of all public agencies in the united states 
    - us constitution deliberately fragments authority across federal, state, and local levels 
- why do we create this crazy quilt system of government authority ?
    - most commone reason people give for fragmenting authority in these ways has to do with the ideal of separation of powers.
    - fragmenting power across intsittuions is a way of ensuring that no one institution has too much power.
    - shouldn't consolidate too much power in one place
    - checks and balances is also part of the ideal of federalism in this country.
- the goal is a reasonable one: it's to make the system harder to abuse. 
- this history is important in the context of criminal justice authority 
- we should want a lot of checks and balances in this context, especially when it could be life or death situations 
- another fragmented rational has to do with democracy 
- simplest idea of democracy is that we want people who are affected by govt actions to be able to influence it 
    - this the rational for public official oversight of gov't agencies. 
    - in particular, putting as many gov't functions as we can under local control
    - local control allows govt institutions to be more responsive to local conditions 
    - political oversight structures 
    - legal oversight is related to democratic ideals as well 
    - real democracies always put limits on state power, especially against minorities 
    - uncontstrained majority rule is too crude a way to be responsive
    - a gov't that just does what the majority wants is not responsive to persistent minorities and social groups 
    - at their best they are vehicles for making govt more responsive to our interests, even when we are not in the political majority
    - this is the role of the courts, which gives individuals a chance to defend their rights
    - other oversight mechanisms give smaller specific interest groups a chance to exercise some influence over the process, even when they are not the majority or in political power at the time
        - this is the idea behind including minority representation on police oversight boards
        - giving people a chance to voice their concerns and to demand justification for how govt power is being exercised over their communities. 
- fragmentation is a way of vesting authority over what public agencies are going to do and forcing them to justify their actions over the community

- separation of pwoers
    - best protection against abuse of power is to avoid concentrating it in one place
- people who are being affected by authority need to have a voice in the process 
- and need to be able to demand justification for how that power is being exercised over them

- re: memo -- AA CRB is not traditional, it's scope is a little more broad. 
    - question is thinking about what is the most needed for the community 
    - what is the priority

### problems
- policing in hte united states 
    - the people who are most affected by policing have little voice over what police do and how they do it
    - separation of powers is not working out in lots of places

what do we do about that? 
- this class doesn't have a blueprint on how to fix it
- there is no single model, because every city is different 
- every city is different and priorities will change 

for example:
- ferguson, a majority black city has been run by majority white gov't for decades
- houston: civil rights community provides too few controls over the police 
- all type of different ways in which oversight of police depts or public agencies goes wrong

memo: current landscape of policing is varied, so should we describe the AA context 
- one of the mlive articles gives some good context 

best fit approach makes more sense than the best practices approach:
- set of practices to draw from 

- specific institutional forms

key dimensions of oversight: 
*what does good police oversight oversee?*
1. the content of police policy: when can officers use tasers? when can they stop and question someone, etc.
    - sometimes policies are constrained by legal rules, but those restraints are too broad in a lot of cases. so like in other areas of the public sector, one of the most important aspects is not the law, but actually setting policy more directly within the bounds of the law. 
    - too often these policies have been developed (rulemaking in police agencies) by the police themselves. This is an issue in terms of democracy and in terms of separation of powers: auditors, city council hearings, citizen police councils, etc. are all devices for trying to make sure that the rules that govern policing are not entirely a product of the police themselves.
2. compliance with policies and laws (that already exist)
    - this is what complaint monitoring is about.
    - this is also what legal action is about.
    - making sure that police are conforming to the standards that have been developed, **and making sure they are not being monitoried only by the police.** Want to make sure that there's an outside actor that has some authority as well.
    - this is the most controversial aspect of police oversight. police resent it and they don't want outsiders to have a say in how they do their jobs. 
    - empowering outside groups to review investigations, allowing auditors and inspectors general access to policy and procedure, etc. are all ways of trying to make sure that the police are not the only ones who are monitoring their own compliance with the law.
    - all these can be forms of introducing more independence into the process of accountability into the police oversight process.
3. the content of departmental practices 
    - how offices use discretion is super important. as we try to develop oversight mechanisms, we also want to have some way of putting pressure on the way in which disrection is used to encourage officers to use it wisely. 
    - how much attention should officers give to recurrent noice problems? how should they treat people during traffic stops? 
    - this is the trickiest part of police oversight, because it means that policies and laws are nothign more than what the people who carry them out actually do. policy as a set of abstract rules is often pretty thin for regulating front-line practices. 
    - forman suggests that how community policing can be used best is as a form of oversight over the way in which officers use their discretion.
    - another form of this is police auditors -- they can look closely at the work of officers on the streets, and how they use their discretion. for example the portland auditor about hip hop parties. they described an actual practice to parties, and compared it to their response to other music events. 

Challenges:
- disagreement that arises inoversight context. multiple publics who have different ideas about what the police oversight should look like.
    - it's not clear whose opinion you should give weight to
    - different populations will have different priorities
    - what to do when the crb disagrees with the auditor?
    - these types of problems are inherent to the problem of public management 
- need for expertise, and integrating expertise with input.
    - expertise has to be a part of public input 
    - people may not end up liking the consequences of the procedures and policies they choose. 
    - need to allow some room for expertise to inform the policymaking process. who have a sense of what the consequences, and perhaps alternatives of different courses of action might be. 

how much of this holds beyond policing? 
- short answer is we don't know!
- in the first half of the course, most internal management techniques do apply to other public agencies.
- some mechanisms are fairly generic:
    - city council, congress, state gov all engage in oversight of public agencies.
    - the details of how they do it are different, but the basics of various forms of legislative oversight are the same
    - courts impose all sorts of oversight and limits on public agencies, the constraints they place on police tend to be more graphic, but civil suits for damages and injunctive relief are common in other areas of public management. 
    - unions and insurance companies are important stakeholders in other public agencies as well.
    - unions are not a force in all public sector contexts, but they are important in many.
    - inspector generals are not present in all public sector agencies, but they do exist in lots of contexts.
- police oversight is just one case of the oversight of public agencies and it is a unique case, but there are some similarities.


