## assigned reading: Walker - Governing the Police

### reading notes 
Framework for police reform needs 3 things (Joanna Schwartz):
-  leverage (pressure)
-  motivation  
-  resources (time/money)  

-  police developed a habit of saying mayors were antipolice when they questioned their role.  
-  modern police form has it's roots in 19th cent. london metropolitan police  
-  policing in the US southeast was heavily influenced by slavery
-  late 19th cent: no public interest groups advocating for changes in policing  
-  OW Wilson (1950) - Police Administration: First textbook on the police.  
-  1950s-60s: Idea began to form that **police were a body of experts, equipped with domain specific knowledge about crime and it's control**
    -  allowed police to dismiss concerns from the public as them not understanding.  
#### civilian review
-  Kerner comission (1968)
-  police chiefs opposed it
-  three reasons CRBs only allow limited citizen participation in policing:  
    -  citizens complaints only represent a small part of police operations  
    -  most CRBs only review complaints forwarded to the by the police departments 
        -  actual investigation is done by the police department
    -  review boards can only make non-binding recommendations  

### class notes  

-  structure of gov't authority over public orgs is difficult in the US by design.  
-  constitution deliberately fragments power across courts, legislatures, and executive.  
-  also fragment authority across levels of gov't: federal, state, and local.

public manager shares authority for doing their job with a lot of other levels.  
-  collaboration is required to get things done  

relative to private sector, some of hte people wiht the greatest influence over what Public orgs do, don't work directly for the org. (mayors, city managers, federal administrators, etc.)

focus of the class: distributed authority and how it relates to public management, with a case study on policing and police reform.  

role of: 
- local partnerships 
- politics 
- local governance 
-  etc 

and how they shape local policing, and how that compares to other public agencies and their external management  

### external policing in the US  
class is broken into 2 parts: 
-  description of landscape of policing oversight in the us 
-  reform: how can we make policing more democratic
    -  start with democratic oversight attempts 
    -  police auditor/inspector general model  

