## 2023-11-09 notes 

### from last time 
- in most states, sherrif's elections are non-partisan. 
- california is non-partisan, as well as louisiana, and tennessee.
- florida has some partisan and some non-partisan.

### memo 
- objection that people like jeff sessions is that there is already plenty of oversight of police deprt already 
- a good memmo will cover general role of the courts
- role of local gov't, among other things 
- and talk about role of all the different stakeholders play in police oversight and where does the DOJ fit in. 
- **use as a resource: doj overview reading from the DOJ class**

### today: mechanism's of police oversight

Review: 

### mechanism's of police oversight

discussed these mechanism's last time 

1. selecting leadership 
    - sherrif's usually elected directly
    - police chiefs usually appointed by elected officials 
2. budgets 
3. rulemaking 
4. informal influence 

however:
> "deliberate community choices rarely have more than a limited effect on police behavior"
- wilson, varieties of police behavior

the reason for this is that police work is about managing complex situations in the community. it's is very hard to bring under administrative control and thus very hard to bring under political control

in general wilson says the kinds of interventions that public officials try to make to police practice don't really get to the heart of the decisions that police officers make in the field. leaves untouched the issue of how police use their discretion. 

### ways in which public officials influence policing practice 
- focused on specific practices and policies
- wilson is pessimistic about the focus of public officials on rulemaking
    - the policy itself only gets you so far because of how much discretion is involved in the different scenarios police face. 

### examples
- dc council changed protest policing in dc
    - cheh sez: through their investigation, they revealed and influenced police policies 
    - protest policing is more procedural and may be easier to regulate
- since wilsons writing (1960s), there has been more regulation of police procedure

### when is oversight appropriate and when is it not 

- difference between precise rulemaking vs. general rulemaking 
    - precise rulemaking is able to address specific situations, but may not address other related issues.
    - general rulemaking has more broad applicability

> political input into policing can sometimes be unilateral and trend-following. 

tyranny of the majority:
- we want the majority to have input into policing practices, but not at the expense of the minority.
- there needs to be some sense of: what are the limits of democratic political oversight into police practice with respect to protecting minority rights?

bottom line: local govt has an important role is setting policing priorities. wilson says that public officials face some hurdles in trying to influence police practice.

### unions  
-  have the ability to advance or hinder efforts to shape police depts 
- this is true in other areas of public sector reform efforts as well: teachers unions, etc.

share of public sector workers in unions (2021):
- private sector: 7%
- federal govt: 29%
- state govt: 33%

### obstacles

- in many contexts people discuss unions as an obstacle to reforms 
- repeatedly see lawsuits and criminal prosecutions of police officers blocked by police unions 
- reform efforts have been blocked by unions 
- alarming rhetoric from police union presidents -- john cataranza, chicago police union head defended january 6th rioters.

### fisk and richardson 
- effort to explore whether there is a more progressive story to tell about police unions and their role in police reform 
- whether police unions are unavoidably obstructionist in regards to police reform and change or whether their power can be harnessed to advance reform efforts.

1. in what respoects are police unions an obstacle to reform (and in what aspects are they not)?
2. in what respects are they neutral about reform?
3. in what respects are they a potential ally in reform efforts?

### unions
police unions take many different forms across the country. they also have different powers in different jurisdictions. in some states police unions are not actually allowed to exist (georgia, virginia)

- in most states and cities, __most__ police officers are represented by a union. 
- limits of collective bargaining vary from state to state as well 

### public sector worker protections 
- police cannot be compelled (threatened with firing) to self incriminating testimony (fifth amendment)
- this is not a part of police union contracts, this is a constitutional protection!
    - garrity v. new jersey (1967)

other provisions that police unions have won:
- LEOBOR: Law Enforcement Officer Bill of Rights 
- right to an attorney during questioning
- provisions that require a department to destroy complaint records after a certain period of time (sometimes a very short amount of time)

Common Thread:
a lot of the concern over police unions concerns police discipline.
- labor law says that management has an obligation to discuss changes in working conditions with the union.
- what counts as a provision that implicates discussing union contracts vs what is management prerogative
- police unions have been able to argue that disciplinary procedures are a part of the union contract and thus management has to negotiate with the union over changes to disciplinary procedures.

interesting thing that  fisk and richardson want to highlight: 
- if an officer breaks a rule (regarding use of force), you activate the disciplinary process, and the union has a powerful voice in that process. 
- what the union doesn't have as much of a say in is what that rule looks like in the first place. 
- management can make unilateral changes to the substance of the rules police are supposed to follow

tldr: frontline officers sometimes have useful things to say to help the cause of making policign better. unions can be a vehicle for conveying those voices more formally. there is an interesting overlap with what front-line officers complain about today and quite radical reformers:
- compstat 
thought is to bring unions into the reform conversation more generally and not just as an obstacle to reform.

main point: how labor law structures the situation here
- unions not always opposed to reform efforts 
- need to take a look at more 
