## Reviewing the Evidence: Part 1

Paper: Matthew Smith, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, Eric Zwick, Capitalists in the Twenty-First Century, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume 134, Issue 4, November 2019, Pages 1675–1745, https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjz020

### Research Questions
Matthew Smith, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick compile novel tax data and design several natural experiments to investigate the human capital contribution to income for top earners in the United States. The paper also explores how the income sources of the top 1% have changed over time. In the course of the paper, the authors also describe the composition of income sources for the top 1%, some demographic characteristics of top earners (age and "self-made" status), as well as the proportion of returns from labor versus financial and physical capital.

### Data
The authors construct a novel dataset of tax data at the top of the income distribution. This includes de-identified data on incomes from using personal tax returns, restricted to the top 1% of earners. This personal income data is then supplemented with information on [fill in with the type of business data]
The authors follow definitions from Piketty and Saez of total income as wages plus business income and any other capital income. Fiscal income is defined as wages, salaries, tips, pension distributions, and annuities, where only wages are considered as returns to human capital.


### Empirical Predictions
While the authors do not make any explicit empirical predictions, one of the motivations for the paper an estimation assumption in Piketty, Saez, and Zucman, which sets 0% of S-corporation income as income from labor, and only 70% of the remaining income from pass-throughs as labor income. Based on this motivation, their implicit prediction is that this assumption is too large.

### Empirical Tests
After establishing with their comprehensive tax data that top earners are primarily working-age owners of profitable firms in skill-intensive industries who derive most of their income as wages and pass-through profits, the authors then turn to two natural experiment event studies to try to disentangle the owners specific contributions to business profits of these owners.
The first experiment uses premature death of business owners to measure the impact on business profits. To do this the authors construct a panel data set matching firms along multiple paramters, where one set of firms experience an owner death. Other matching restrictions include limiting to firms with substantial pre-period sales, and restricting to owners who owned at least 20% of the firm. The main outcome estimates are profit per pre-period worker, which allows for comparisons across firms of different sizes pre-owner death. They find that owner death causes an 82% decline in firm profits, which they interpret as evidence that firm owners contributed profitable human capital to the firms.
In a second natural experiment, Zwick and friends construct another panel data set of firms who have an owner retire to measure the impact on business profits. This is to address concerns that premature death may reflect disruptions in business operations, rather than exogenous removal of human capital. Using similar restrictions to build matching firms without retiring owners, the authors find that the owner retirement estimates of impact are similar to those estimated using owner deaths as an instrument (81.6%). After calculating a possible range between 62.4% and 90.8%, the authors settle on a 75% estimate of the share of labor income in the form of returns to human capital.


### Findings and Implications
#### Who earns top incomes and from what sources?
After constructing the top income data set, Zwick and company are able to create descriptive statistics on the composition of top earners by income source and provide a picture of what types of firms top owners exist at the top of the income distribution. They find that among top earners from the 90th to 99th percentile of the income distribution, the main source of income is from wages. In addition, business income represents a much higher component of top incomes than previously assumed, and only at the very top of the income distribution does income from capital investments make up the majority of income: "Fewer than one in six people in the 99.9th percentile derive most of their income from interest, rents, and other capital income" (13).
In answering the composition of top earner income, the authors find that the majority earn pass-through income as the owners of businesses. The age distribution of these earners is similar to the age distribution of other workers, with the majority between the ages of 40 and 59.
The authors move on to characterize the types of firms owned by these pass-through owners. They find that the average firms are mid-market in size, with 72% of firms having less than $50M in profit. Reinforcing the idea that pass-through owners are not collecting rents, these owners are not diversified in their ownership of firms, with only 7% reporting only passive income from pass-throughs. The authors claim this is consistent with active owner management of firms.
#### How can we characterize the industry composition of these top earner-owned firms?
When discussing industry composition, Zwick and the gang classify the industries using 1- and 4-digit NAICS codes. They find that the majority of the top pass-through firms are in human-capital-intensive industries, such as professional services or health services (lawyers, consultants, physicians, etc.). These firms are also shown to be highly profitable, which the authors contend is consistent with the idea that profits are reflecting returns to human capital.
#### What do top earning pass-through owners contribute?
In order to test this claim empirically, the authors turn to the natural experiments of owner death and retirement to measure the impact on business profits. They find that owner death causes an 82% decline in firm profits, and owner retirement causes an 81.6% decline in firm profits, as compared to firms where no death or retirement occurs. The authors interpret these results as evidence that firm owners labor contributed profitable human capital to the firms.

### Ethical and Normative Assumptions
#### Compounding Returns to Firm Permanence:
Zwick, et al. contribute to a growing literature that seeks to understand the sources of top incomes. Using expansive tax and business return data, they are able to isolate the contribution of pass-through owners to business profits, and conservatively estimate that around 82% of pass-through income going to firm owners is a return to human capital. This estimate is created by taking the difference in profits between affected firms (where the owner dies), and counterfactual firms, dividing that by normal profits at the counterfactual firm, and then dividing again by average pass-through ownership shares (67%). The authors attempt to control for a number of factors, including firm size, owner-age, firm sales, industry and firm organizational form. While controlling for firm sales in year t-1, they do not consider age of firms. Firm age and industry standing could impact outcomes after owner death, affecting estimates of the human capital returns that owner brought. It would be an interesting extension of this work to investigate the importance of firm age and industry standing on post-owner death outcomes.
#### Meritocracy and Bias:
The authors use pass-through profits paid to firm owners as a measure of returns to human capital. An investigation into firms switching from C-corporations to S-corporations motivates their conclusion that there is a tax incentive to reclassify labor income as pass-through income for owners, and as such pass-through profits can be used as a proxy for returns to human capital. The authors do not consider the impacts of bias in firm compensation for labor, or the impacts of discrimination on the returns to human capital. Research has shown wage gaps across race and gender, which can compound over time. It would be interesting to see if distributions of returns to human capital are different across demographic groups.
