I. After the killing of Michael Brown by police officer Darren Wilson in 2014, the Ferguson Police Department (FPD) was investigated by the Department of Justice, who issued their report the following year after spending over 3 months in Ferguson, reviewing over 35,000 documents, and interviewing community members, police officers and city officials. 
When the DOJ released their initial investigation, they found that the Ferguson Police Department, along with the municipal courts, had been engaging in systematic unconstitutional policing and enforcement practices, specifically targeted towards the Black community in Ferguson. At the conclusion of the report, the DOJ made 26 recommendations (13 specifically for the police department) to put Ferguson on the path to confront "those problems and repair[ing] the City’s relationship with the community." After the report publication, the Ferguson City council voted to reject, and then amend the recommendations, only reversing their vote once the DOJ initiated a civil lawsuit against the city. The Consent Decree (CD) was signed in 2016, using as its organizing ideal the concept of “community policing”, which the city agreed to adopt as an organizational strategy for the FPD.
Community Policing is an organizational concept in policing that reframes the issues of public safety as ones that are best addressed in the form of a partnership between the police department and the local community. The community becomes an active participant in efforts to address crime, disorder, and quality of life issues in the neighborhood. 
In the next section (II), I review the recommendations made by the DOJ in the Ferguson report and take those recommendations to form a DOJ definition of community policing. In section III, I evaluate community policing as an organizational strategy, and discuss whether the actions taken to enforce the consent decree are enough to transform the Ferguson police department into a good faith community policing attempt. In section IV, I discuss the limitations of community policing, especially given the subsequent issues in Ferguson, and I conclude in section V. 
II. The Ferguson consent decree puts forward a comprehensive set of reforms for the city to implement, and in so doing define the DOJ's own vision of what a model community policing strategy could look like for a police department found violating the constitutional rights of the community. A majority of the recommendations are specific about establishment and engagement (or reengagement) with community groups in Ferguson. The decree notes: "strong community partnerships and frequent positive interactions between police and members of the public make policing more effective, increase public confidence in law enforcement, and can reduce bias". To that end, the first step in that process required the City of Ferguson to host a number of facilitated dialogue sessions between the community and the police department, and require attendance by all FPD officers (at least once). As a step to meaningfully bolster community organizational capacity, Ferguson agreed to establish a Neighborhood Policing Steering Committee (NPSC), who along with the existing Civilian Review and Youth Advisory Boards would provide input in the development of a new community-engagement plan, a neighborhood policing plan, and a crime prevention plan, "oriented around community priorities and partnerships, and based on problem-solving principles." The next set of recommendations from the Consent Decree (CD) focus on personnel, training, and operations. Section IV.A agrees to consider any indications of unlawful discrimination in officer hiring and promotion. Section D of the consent decree details the plans for "monthly command meetings to discuss and analyze significant crimes, crime trends, ... as well as community priorities for policing, and to develop strategies for working with community members to address these issues." The CD establishes that officers should undergo "at least 50 hours of annual in-service training each year", and recommends NPSC input on the types of training for officers. The initial DOJ report recommended training on implicit bias, procedural justice, and the negative impacts of profiling. The decree also recommends NPSC input on hiring practices, in order to encourage a more diverse police force, and requires the FPD make changes to its officer patrol schedule. In order to encourage "direct officer-resident communication", officers are assigned to patrol specific areas for one year. The decree also recommends that no officer work more than 14 hours per day.  
III. Efforts at implementing a true community policing model are difficult and require sustained commitment and investment, from police departments, municipal officials, and community members. There are several organizational management aspects that need to be implemented in tandem in order to ensure a whole-of-government approach to community policing as a guiding principle. The consent decree outlined many of the aspects that need to be addressed in order to effect change at scale. As mentioned above, changes to monitoring, performance evaluation, training and hiring all need to be addressed internally, as well as developed in consultation with community members. One of the mandates of the decree was that the City would appoint an independent monitor to oversee its implementation, and would submit to regular published reports. In the intervening years, we can see that the attempt to turn Ferguson into a community policing model has been relatively unsuccessful. Reforming policing models takes a lot of resources, with reports at the time estimating that the consent decree would cost the city of Ferguson over $3 million over the 3 years. In the next section, I will look at the independent monitor update reports from Ferguson, which detail the progress that the city has made in implementing the reforms mandated by the consent decree. 
IV. In looking at a recent independent monitor report, Ferguson has struggled to make satisfactory progress on many of the reforms. The delays have primarily been in three areas: community engagement, training, and data analysis. It is clear that funding and management struggles have contributed to the issues that Ferguson has faced in abiding by the terms of the consent decree. Since entering into the agreement in 2016, the city of Ferguson has yet to complete a Community Engagement Plan to submit to the monitor. In addition, the monitor report noted that the FPD has struggled to complete a finalized training schedule, which was also highlighted in the previous year’s report. In contrast, the Monitor congratulated the FPD on contracting with a data analytics firm, who would begin an initial analysis of the data reporting gaps that exist within the current reporting capabilities of the FPD, and make subsequent recommendations. Meanwhile, although the report notes that certain ad-hoc training has been implemented, the frontline workers in the FPD are still working, presumably with training that has not been updated to adhere to the principles of community policing. These issues with compliance illustrate the difficulty of reorienting a police department whose practices, as noted in the DOJ Investigation, “have sown deep mistrust between parts of the community and the police department, undermining law enforcement legitimacy among African Americans in particular."
V. Given the difficulties that the Ferguson Police Department has faced complying with the Consent Decree, it’s possible that other, more radical actions should be taken. It’s important to emphasize that while FPD has been undergoing independent monitoring, and ostensibly making attempts at articulating training and policies to effect change in their practices, the frontline workers of the department continue in their daily tasks of addressing public safety, responding to calls for service, and interacting with the community. In light of this,