To: David Thacher, Council Member, Ward 1
From: Francisco Brady, Ann Arbor Police Research Executive Forum (AAPREF)
Re: Recommendations for the Independent Community Police Oversight Commission
Date: December 8, 2023

Context:
In 2019 the Ann Arbor City Council approved the establishment of an Independent Community Police Oversight Commission (ICPOC) of the Ann Arbor Police Department (AAPD). As the ordinance notes, the formation of the ICPOC is aimed at "reframing the relationship that the residents of Ann Arbor have with the police and an investment in the smart, equitable, community-oriented policing".[1] As the commision enters it's fourth year, AAPERF has been asked to review the ordinance creating the ICPOC and provide an assessment of the Commission's track record in reviewing policing in Ann Arbor, as well as recommend any changes that might increase the Commission's efficacy. The rest of this brief is organized as follows: section one will review the existing police oversight landscape--and it's limiations--before the establishment of the ICPOC. Section two details the organization of the ICPOC and how it has and can continue to contribute to the police oversight landscape in Ann Arbor. Section three will highlight the key challenges to success in police oversight commissions, with lessons from other cities, and section four will conclude with a proposal for ammendments to the ICPOC ordinance that will enhance it's effectiveness.
I. The Police Oversight Landscape in Ann Arbor, Pre-ICPOC
Prior to the establishment of the ICPOC in Ann Arbor, the landscape of police oversight looked similar to many other smaller towns and cities across America. Partly as a result of the federal system, there is no explicit central authority over the functions of police departments in the United States, unlike in other countries such as Australia or the United Kingdom. What follows is a brief review of the oversight mechanisms available in Ann Arbor prior to the establishment of the commission.
a. Political Oversight:
The authority of police departments in the United States of America is derived from the state and the county or smaller jurisdiction. In Ann Arbor, the city council has the authority over the police department's budget and the city administrator recommends candidates that the city council considers for the job of police chief. This authority allows the city council to affect the culture of the police department and is one the of ways in which it can exercise oversight over the police department. The second main way in which political oversight over AAPD is exercised is in the consideration and adoption of ordinances dictating police priorities and practices. For example, Ann Arbor city ordinances chapter 118, section 9:328B increased the legal age of tobacco purchase from 18 to 21. In this way the city council can influence priorities and practices of the police department.
b. Legal Oversight:
If a person believes that they were involved in an encounter with the police where the officer violated their consitutional rights, they may file a complaint with the Department of Justice (DOJ). If complaints about this type of misconduct are placed with enough frequency, the DOJ can then begin a "Pattern or Practice" investigation, in which they investigate a police department to establish whether there is a pattern or practice of unlawful conduct within a law enforcement agency. The subsequent investigation may result in a consent decree, where the department is required under threat of lawsuit by the DOJ to change it's practices and agree to certain measures aimed at improving training, compliance with constitutional policing practices, and improving community relations.
c. Internal Oversight:
Police departments are also subject to internal oversight, which is conducted by the police department itself. In Ann Arbor, the AAPD has an Professional Standards division, which is responsible for investigating complaints against officers. The division allows citizens to file complaints and states that it will "investigate all allegations and complaints of misconduct against any member of the police department or concerns about our department's policies and procedures"[2].
d. Community Oversight:
Many police departments also have a community oversight board, which is composed of community members and is tasked with reviewing the police department's policies and practices. In 2019, the Ann Arbor city council established the Independet Police Community Police Oversight Commissoin (ICPOC) as an avenue for community oversight of police. The following section will discuss it's structure and accomplishments to date.
2. The Independent Community Police Oversight Commission
The commission is composed of 11 voting members, approved by the city council, including 1 youth member. The composition of the board is encouraged to comprise of members who reflect the demographic composition of the city, as well as from groups who "tend to have significant negative interactions with the police"[3].
a. ICPOC Authority
The ICPOC is granted authority to review incidents of police misconduct, on the basis of complaints filed with the commission or the police department itself. These reviews are only allowed to be conducted after AAPD has concluded it's own investigation, and cannot interfere with any ongoing criminal investigations. After the AAPD internal review is completed, the Chief is required to submit a report to the ICPOC, with which it will conduct it's own review. The ICPOC is also granted the authority to review AAPD policies and procedures, and to make non-binding recommendations to the city council and the police chief. The ICPOC is also charged with publishing an annual report to the city council, which details the number of complaints received. Since the establishment of the commission, AAPREF has not been able to locate any of these reports publicly accessible online.

b. Accomplishments of the ICPOC
Since it's inception, the ICPOC has introduced two resolutions for consideration by the City Council. In 2022, ICPOC introduced a resolution, which was adopted by the city council, to explore the creation of an unarmed public safety program to respond to situations which do not require an armed response by AAPD. Another recommendation was introduced to the City Council which recommended that the AAPD reduce traffic stops based on specific equipment violations, which was approved by the council. The resolution was introduced after an analysis of traffic stops made by AAPD between 2017 and 2019. The analysis by a research team from Eastern Michigan University found that Black drivers were 2.4 times more likely to be stopped for routine traffic violations[4].

3. Challenges to Success in Police Oversight Commissions
The ICPOC is a relatively new institution, and has expressed frustration in the media about facing hurdles in accessing all of the AAPD documentation they need to conduct thorough investigations. This is made more difficult by the fact that the ICPOC does not have subpoena power to compel the AAPD to provide documentation. In addition, the commission has faced staffing challenges [new chair and some drama with one of the members having to be physically restrained from attacking the chair in one meeting] and currently has one vacancy. The ICPOC should take inspiration from the work of other police oversight commissions in other cities. For example, the 

4. Recommendations for the ICPOC
It is the position of AAPREF that the ICPOC is a valuable institution for the city of Ann Arbor, and that it's effectiveness can be enhanced by the following ammendments to the ordinance establishing the commission:
Financing:
- The ICPOC is currently funded out of the City budget, but that budget should be increased to handle the administrative costs of the commission, including the hiring of an additional full time legal analyst to help in report drafting and investigations.
Reporting:
Currently the ICPOC does not have it's own website or collection of reports available online to the public. The commission should establish a separate internet presence, and should publish all reports online and resolutions online in an easily accessible format.
Investigations:
- The ICPOC should be granted subpoena power to compel the AAPD to provide documentation necessary for investigations.
- The ICPOC should be granted the authority to conduct it's own investigations, in addition to reviewing investigations conducted by the AAPD.
- The ICPOC should be granted the authority to issue it's own reports on investigations, in addition to reviewing reports issued by the AAPD.
- The ICPOC should be granted the authority to issue it's own recommendations to the city council and the police chief, in addition to reviewing recommendations issued by the AAPD.
