To: Dr. David Thacher, Chair, Johnson 4 America PAC 
From: Francisco Brady, Analyst's R Us 
Subject: Candidate Brandon Johnson's Position on Federal Oversight of Local Policing 
Date: 2021-11-17

Context and History: 
The Department of Justice (DOJ) has been initiating "Pattern or Practice", or 14141 investigations since it was granted the authority in the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994. These investigations are usually in response to complaints or as a result of suits brought by local community activists or civil rights groups, which bring to attention practices that may violate the constitution's guarantee of protection in the Fourth Amendment, as well as use of excessive force; discriminatory policing; violation of the constitutional rights of criminal suspects; or violation of First Amendment rights. 
These investigations are conducted by the DOJ Civil Rights Division. Often they involve interviewing officers and community activists, reviewing documents, and observing police activity. Based on their findings, the DOJ will then issue a report with their assessment of the department. If the DOJ finds a "pattern or practice of discrimination and constitutional violations, they will pursue a consent decree with the police department and the municipality to negotiate the implementation of their recommendations. 
During the Trump administration, Attorney General Jeff Sessions released a memo outlining key ideas on the practice of 14141 investigations, as well as establishing new requirements such as sign-off from senior DOJ officials, required sunset dates for consent decrees, and limits on what the DOJ can require of state and city agencies entering into consent decrees. With Sessions' tenure as Attorney General, Pattern and Practice investigations were de-emphasized, only pursuing one consent decree in the four years of the administration. After the 2020 election, Joe Biden, appointed Merrick Garland as Attorney General, and the DOJ has since rescinded the Sessions memo and pursued more vigorous investigation. 
Policy Recommendations: 
It is the view of Analyst's R Us that Brandon Johnson should endorse a balanced approach, which emphasizes community involvement in Federal oversight of policing. The Johnson campaign should recognize the importance of continuing to pursue investigations into constitutional violations; at the same time, the campaign should stress a departure from the Obama/Biden DOJ agenda. The campaign should emphasize that it will not pursue investigations as the sole policy tool in the effort towards addressing police misconduct.
As a candidate for mayor to run America's third largest city, Brandon Johnson promised to reorient the Chicago Police Department practices to emphasize "Treatment not Trauma", the same motivating principles should shape the campaign's approach to federal oversight of local policing. During the mayoral campaign, Johnson called for new investments in public safety, mental health, and other public services to address the underlying problems associated with crime and violence, in collaboration with community groups. As mayor, Johnson established the Deputy Mayor for Community Safety, to increase coordination across community groups with the police on these issues. In keeping with this approach, the Johnson campaign should advocate for a collaborative model of federal oversight, offering funding at the local level for initiatives encouraging local law enforcement collaboration with community groups, especially groups focused specifically on violence prevention.
The Johnson campaign should rely on the candidate's history as an organizer with the Chicago Teachers Union to emphasize his support of community input into local issues. In language that will appeal to both liberal and conservative voters, presidential candidate Johnson can voice support for DOJ investigations into the most egregious cases of police misconduct, while also giving strong support to local control and voice to community advocates for violence prevention and other public safety issues. If asked, presidential candidate Johnson can make reference to the strong rationale for encouraging police oversight by Civilian Complaint Review Boards (CCRBs), which–if given sufficient independence and funding–can result in decreases in police misconduct and violence. In order to encourage local acceptance of these boards, the Johnson campaign should commit to increased oversight by the DOJ for police jurisdictions that do not have CCRBs or similar community review boards in place.  
Conclusion:  
Given Brandon Johnson’s history as a community-focused voice, we at Analyst’s R Us believe that pursuing a prominent strategy that breaks with both liberal and conservative tradition on the topic of police oversight will increase interest in the campaign. This strategy allows the candidate to take advantage of the federal oversight authority given to the Department of Justice, focusing on police departments that do not have Civilian Review Boards, while also emphasizing a “federalist” approach, allocating funding opportunities to groups who collaborate with local police departments on violence prevention and crime reduction strategies. 
