Prompt: Analyze the overall agenda for police reform in Ferguson, not just the specific problems regarding use of force revealed in the DOJ Report on the Ferguson Police Department. After releasing its findings report, the DOJ negotiated a consent decree with city officials that outlined a plan for police reform in Ferguson. The organizing ideal for that plan was the concept of “community policing”, which the city agreed to adopt as an organizational strategy for the FPD. **Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of “community policing” as a strategic concept to guide police reform in Ferguson.** Does the idea of “community policing” articulated in the consent decree provide a compelling organizational strategy that police managers and outside stakeholders can use to guide and evaluate reform efforts in Ferguson? If your answer to the previous question is “no”, discuss an alternative framework that Ferguson should use to guide police reform. How could the managerial interventions that we covered in class be used to advance the community policing agenda that the DOJ outlines (or, if you find community policing inadequate, the alternative strategic agenda that you think should guide the city’s reforms)?

Subject: Police Reform Efforts in Ferguson
To: David Thacher, Managing Director of BCG
From: Francisco Brady
Date: 2023-10-13  

Outline:
I. Introduction
   A. Brief description of the state of police reform in Ferguson
After the killing of Michael Brown by police officer Darren Wilson in 2014, the Ferguson Police Department (FPD) was investigated by the Department of Justice, who issued their report the following year after spending over 3 months in Ferguson, reviewing over 35,000 documents, and interviewing community members, police officers and city officials. (1)
B. Brief summary of the DOJ Report on the Ferguson Police Department
When the DOJ released the report, they found that the Ferguson Police Department, along with the municipal courts, had been engaging in systematic unconstitutional policing and enforcement practices, specifically targeted towards the Black community in Ferguson. At the conclusion of the report, the DOJ made 26 recommendations (13 specifically for the police department) to put Ferguson on the path to confront "those problems and repairing the City’s relationship with the community" (90). After the report publication, the Ferguson City council voted to reject, and then amend the recommendations[^2], only reversing their vote once the DOJ initiated a civil lawsuit against the city. The consent decree was signed in 2016, and used as its template the recommendations laid out in the report for comprehensive police (and court) reform. The organizing ideal of the plan was the concept of “community policing”, which the city agreed to adopt as an organizational strategy for the FPD.
   C. Introduction to the concept of "community policing"
[re-edit this later] Community Policing is an organizational[?] concept in policing that reframes the issues of public safety as ones that are best addressed in the form of a partnership between the police department and the local community. The community becomes an active participant in efforts to address crime, disorder, and quality of life issues in the neighborhood. This policing model emphasizes building collaborative relationships with community members and local organizations, identifying and engaging in problem-solving to address the root causes of crime and disorder. [source]
   D. Structure
In the next section, I review the recommendations made by the DOJ in the Ferguson report and take those recommendations to form a DOJ definition of community policing. In section III, I evaluate community policing as an organizational strategy, and discuss whether the actions taken to enforce the consent decree are enough to transform the Ferguson police department into a good faith community policing attempt. In section IV, I discuss the limitations of the community policing, especially given the subsequent issues in Ferguson, and I conclude in section V.  

II. Community Policing as Defined by the DOJ
   i. Community Engagement
The Ferguson consent decree puts forward a comprehensive set of reforms for the city to implement, and in so doing define the DOJ's own vision of what a model community policing strategy could look like for a police department found violating constitutional to regain the trust and cooperation of the overpoliced Black population of Ferguson. A majority of the recommendations are specific about establishment and engagement (or reengagement) with community groups in Ferguson. The decree notes: "strong community partnerships and frequent positive interactions between police and members of the public make policing more effective, increase public confidence in law enforcement, and can reduce bias" (4). To that end, the first step in that process required the City of Ferguson to host a number of facilitated dialogue sessions between the community and the police department, and require attendance by all FPD officers (at least once). As a step to meaningully boslter community organizational capacity, Ferguson agreed to establish a Neighborhood Policing Steering Committee (NPSC), who along with the existing Civilian Review and Youth Advisory Boards would provide input in the development of a new community-engagement plan, a neighborhood policing plan, and a crime prevention plan, "oriented around community priorities and partnerships, and based on problem-solving principles" (7). 
   ii. evaluation and iteration 
Section IV.A agrees to consider any indications of unlawful discrimination in officer hiring and promotion. Section D of the consent decree details the plans for "monthly command meetings to discuss and analyze significant crimes, crime trends, ... as well as community priorities for policing, and to develop strategies for working with community members to address these issues." (8). 
   iii. training
The consent decree established that officers should undergo "least 50 hours of annual in-service training each year", and recommends NPSC input on the types of training for officers. The initial DOJ report recommended trainings on implicit bias, procedural justice, and the negative impacts of profiling (DOJ Report, 94). 
   iv. hiring and scheduling
The decree also recommends NPSC input on hiring practices, in order to encourage a more diverse police force, and requires the the FPD make changes to it's officer patrol schedule. In order to encourage "direct officer-resident communication", officers are assigned to patrol specific areas for one year. The decree also recommends that no officer work more than 14 hours per day.   
III. Evaluation of Community Policing as an Organizational Strategy
Efforts at implementing a true community policing model are difficult and require sustained commitment and investment, from police departments, municipal officials, and community members. There are several organizational management aspects that need to be implemented in tandem in order to ensure a whole-of-government approach to community policing as a guiding principle. The consent decreee outlined many of the aspects that need to be addressed in order to effect change at scale. As mentioned above, changes to monitoring and performance evaluation, training and hiring, and monitoring all need to be addressed internally, as well as developed in consultation with community members. One of the mandates of the decree was that the City would appoint a monitor to oversee it's implementation, and would submit to regular published reports. In the intervening years, we can see that the attempt to turn Ferguson into a community policing model has been relatively unsuccessful. Reforming policing models takes a lot of resources, with reporting at the time estimating that the consent decree would cost the city of Ferguson over $3 million over the 3 years. (https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/06/us/ferguson-voters-give-split-result-on-funding-police-overhaul.html). In the next section, I will look at the independent monitor update reports from Ferguson, which detail the progress that the city has made in implementing the reforms mandated by the consent decreee.  
IV. Limitations of Community Policing Strategies: 
In looking at a recent independent monitor report, Ferguson has struggled to make satisfactory progress on many of the reforms. The delays have primarily been in three areas: community engagement, training, and data analysis. 
i. Community Engagement
Since entering into the consent decree in 2016, the city of Ferguson has yet to complete a Community Engagement Plan to submit to the monitor. (9)
ii. Training
The Winter 2020 Independent Monitor's report noted that the FPD has struggled to complete a finalized training schedule, which was also highlighted in the 2019 report. 
iii. Data Analysis
In the winter 2020 report, the monitor noted congratulated the FPD on contracting with a data analytics contractor, who would begin an initial analysis of the data reporting gaps that exist within the current reporting capabilities of the FPD, and make subsequent recommendations. 
IV. 
"Community engagement remains a critical aspect of the decree and is one area that has not yet been adequately contemplated or resourced by the City" (5, https://www.moed.uscourts.gov/sites/moed/files/documents/416cv0180-0128.pdf).)


[use this quote later: "Ferguson’s police {and municipal court} practices have sown deep mistrust
between parts of the community and the police department, undermining law enforcement
legitimacy among African Americans in particular."(2)]

[2]: Berman, Mark. “Justice Dept. Sues the City of Ferguson to Force Policing Reform.” The Washington Post, WP Company, 26 Oct. 2021, www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2016/02/10/ferguson-demands-changes-to-agreement-reforming-police-tactics-justice-dept-criticizes-unnecessary-delay/. 