Francisco Brady
Kickstarter Discussion Remarks

1. Would Rawls agree or disagree with Ta-Nehisi Coates?

    I think that Rawls would agree with the facts that Coates lays out in his argument, and that the treatment of African American people in the United States has not been just.
    Rawls subscribes to the Kantian understanding of the person, where:
        "Each person possesses an inviolability founded on justice that even the welfare of society as a whole cannot override. For this reason justice denies that the loss of freedom for some is made right by a greater good shared by others. It does not allow that the sacrifices imposed on a few are outweighed by the larger sum of advantages enjoyed by many. Therefore in a just society the liberties of equal citizenship are taken as settled; the rights secured by justice are not subject to political bargaining or to the calculus of social interests." (Rawls, "A Theory of Justice", 1971, p. 3).
    The institution of slavery, and the subsequent exploitation and theft from African American people in the United States, is a clear violation of these principles. However I do not think that Rawls would explicitly argue for American descendants of slaves to be given reparations, because this policy does not fit within the contractarian framework that he uses to organize his theory of justice. Rawls' elevation of the basic structures, and the argument from the original position to arrive at just principles would not permit a race-based policy of reparations, and only if some parameters were met would he allow for a policy that would benefit a specific group.

2. How would he interpret, flesh out, or rebut his argument?

    In the original position, the negotiators do not know their race, social, or economic status, but they do have knowledge of economic principles and the general state of the world. If we take as given that the negotiators know about historical examples of racial violence, the history of exploitation and extraction from African American people or any other marginalized group in history, then the argument becomes easier. According to the First principle, each person should be accorded the most liberty possible, as long as it doesn't violate anyone else's liberty. Importantly, this means the rights of marginalized or unequal groups (which are allowed to exist), must also be protected. Using this line of reasoning, I think that this must mean that in trying to create a just society, those in the original position behind the veil of ignorance would agree to incorporate some kind of equal protection clause, like the 14th amendment and the Civil Rights Act, into their organization of society. This would protect any one of the negotiators, who do not know if they would end up in an unequal or marginalized population to protect themselves from being exploited by the majority.

3. What for of reparations might Rawls advocate for to promote justice as he understands it? What concrete examples would he use to illustrate his point?

    In defining liberty, Rawls notes that these include political rights and liberties, but also the right to other social primary goods. These include health, access to education, and the ability to live a full life. Ta-Nehisi Coates' detailed account of the exploitation and theft experienced by the African American community in Chicago, specifically through the housing market, is an example of the denial of these social primary goods. Since the negotiators do not know their position, they should be motivated to set up a structure that would adhere to the second principle: even if inequity exists, it should be mediated in such a way that the the greatest benefit is afforded to the least advantaged.

    To this end, I think the Rawls could argue for a **form** of reparations to be built into the structure of society, to ensure that a disadvantaged minority community is able to access the social primary goods that they have historically been denied. Note that this program would not be only for the African American community, since the negotiators do not know their position, or the position of anyone else, or the historical position of any groups. They would only know that a) such historical inequity and exploitation of marginalized groups has existed in the general state of the world, and b) that they, through the first principle, are committed to protecting the liberty and rights of all people. They would also know, with the second principle, that inequality can be tolerated, and that if it exists, it should be allowed only to the extent that it benefits the least advantaged, so they would be obligated to address any eventual inequalities that could arise through historical marginalization and exploitation **preemptively** through a type of investment into any disadvantaged community. This could take the form of a universal basic income, or a program that provides for the health and education of disadvanted communities, to the extent necessary to ensure that they are able to participate in society as equals and fully exercise their rights and liberties.
    An example of a targeted program with conditions focused on development of historically marginalized populations is Opportunities (Oportunidades), which is a program launched in Mexico in 1997. The program provided cash transfers to rural families earning under a minimum income, many of them indigenous, in exchange for the families registering the children in school, enrolling in a health program, and following through with medical checkups. The program has been shown to improve child development, health, and education outcomes, and has been expanded to urban areas and to include more families. It has inspired similar programs in over 50 countries around the world.


