## 2024-01-25

Mechanisms through which mass warfare decreases economic inequality:
- fiscal capacity: total warfare forxes states to increase it's fiscal capacity (income and wealth tax) --> pushed to the brink of collapse.
    - leads to an increase in taxes (on the rich)
- death of low-skill workers = reconstruction = low-skill wages increas relative to high-skill wages --> asymmetric demographic shock
    - leads to increase in labor-power/unionization
- Massive destruction of capital by the wealthy, rationing --> wars lead to destruction of capital
- Extension of franchise triggered by mass mobilization (the median voter is poorer) --> leads to destruction of pre-war exclusionary equilibrium
    - women tend to gain votes after wars
    - weimar republic: women gained the vote after wwi
    - old elites are either killed or replaced
- creation of the welfare state (old elites are wiped out, high fiscal capacity, interventionist state) that replaces guns with "butter" --> destruction of pre-war exclusionary equilibrium
- decolonization: means "foreign assets" are wiped out --> colonial powers are no longer powerful enough to control their empires.
- post-war inflation + debt cancellation also wipes out a significant chunk of wealth --> total warfare is bad for creditors!
    - [Taxing the Rich: A History of Fiscal Fairness in the United States and Europe](https://press.princeton.edu/books/hardcover/9780691165455/taxing-the-rich)
    - show that when taxes are introduced, it's only on the very rich
    - one explanation: mass mobilization/sacrifice builds argument for more equal sharing of the burdens (higher taxation of the rich)

Implications for Market income inequality?
- taxes increased after wwi
- in some countries it leveled out after wwii
- how does this affect wage work?
    - it's possible that it affects labor-leisure mix
    - people might opt for status rather than income

Implications for Wealth Inequality?
- rich have less to save when taxes are higher

Is war enough?
- necessary and sufficient?
- necessary but not sufficient?
- taxes also increased more on the elite in democratic countries vs. nondemocratic countries

Wealth
- destruction in productive centers
- france: areas where industry and coal were destroyed
- wwii: bombings in uk concentrated in london and liverpool (industrial centers)

Other ways to decrease property-related wealth:
- nationalization:
    - make the wealth public
- decrease the income generated by property
    - rent control
    - financial regulation
    - pro-labor industrial policy
    - pro-labor trade policy
        - increases the share of income that goes to labor instead of capital
        - decreases capital income but also the value of capital

How to tackle public debt?
- debt cancellation (Germany, 1953)
- inflation (France, 1945-1948)
- devaluation of currency (Germany, 1948)
    - has consequences for financial markets, but less impacts on citizens in the real economy
- exceptional levies on private wealth (Germany, 1952)


