
## from last time: consent decrees 

### what are the biggest challenges facing these types of programs?  

-  difficulty of sustaining new policies long-term
-  difficulty of monitoring step: 
    - how well does monitoring by the DOJ work
        - DOJ under Jeff Sessions -- said to be a little bit less vigorous with compliance 
-  monitoring is expensive (this is one of the motivations to exit monitoring quickly)
-  does the DOJ pattern and practice investigation have the appropriate deterrent effect? 
    -  biden DOJ focused on high profile cases: minneapolis, louisville
-  when the DOJ comes into a community after a high profile incident, what is their value-add? 
    - in places like memphis, there is already lots of activisim and community involvement pressuring the local police department to address misconduct.  
    -  would the DOJ focus be more valuable focusing on places that do not have the capacity to pressure the police department locally by community activists.  
-  why don't states address police investigations themselves?
    -  california has it's own police pattern and practice investigations department
    -  other states are beginning to do this as well
-  what agencies should the federal govt choose to focus on? 
-  should DOJ be aiming to raise the general standard of policing across the board? Or should they focus only on the most egregious departments? 

## local politics 

### types of oversight 
- legal oversight 
- political oversight

### police are an interesting case of public management 
- public agency 
- because policing so prominently involves people's rights, they are often subject to policitcal oversight
- we have focused on legal oversight so far, but it is ultimately limited.
- there are some fundamental reasons why legal oversight is limited in addressing control over police reform
    - legal oversight is intertwined with political oversight
    - courts can enforce reform when the pd is violating people's rights 
    - at the end of the day, the city council can just absorb the consequences in the form of liability payouts.  
- there are lots of policy choices about what we want in a community beyond just what we want in the law
    - policy-based questions rather than rights-based constitutional questions 
- police have discretion and can follow the lead of the community in terms of their level of aggressive enforcement of certain laws:
    - how aggressively to enforce protestors for blocking traffic

### what are some of the mechanisms that local officials can have on these decisions from the police department? 

- hard to find good academic writing about this
    - 1968 James Q. Wilson book: Varieties of Police Behavior

### Mechanisms of local government oversight  
1.  selecting leadership
    - except sherrifs who are elected directly, which can lead to some strange outcomes. For example Joe Arpaio in Arizona.  
    -  they are elected, but sometimes jurisdiction covers more areas than the sherrif directly serves.
    -  in municipal police departments, the police chief is appointed. often formally by the mayor or the city council.
    -  in theory there is some mechanism through which the general public can influence the type of police department they want.
2.  budget: 
    -  police budget (like every other budget) has to be approved by the city council
    -  most of the police budget is personeel costs, so the municipality can influence police departments in that way
    -  specific line items like fancy technology and weapons is another avenue through which the municipal govt can influence the police department
    -  municipal govt ultimately approves liability payouts -- and could influence police department behavior by refusing to pay out liability claims or require explanations about how they will address the misconduct. 
    -  county sherrif's can raise their own money through contracts for services, and so can take control of their own budget in some limited ways.  
3.  rulemaking: council has the ability to ban or prohibit some types of policing practices. 
    -  ex: banning no-knock raids, limiting police pursuits.
    -  mongtomery county, maryland: county council passed a bill that would ban traffic stops  
    -  some places prohibit police officers from asking about citizenship status during stops. 
4. Informal Influence 
