## 2023-11-16 notes 

first half of the course:
- looking at key stakeholders who are involved in the process of police oversight and accountability: 
    - municipal govt 
    - federal role 
    - insurance providers
    - police unions 

now we are switching gears to focus on prominent reform ideas: 
- how can the relationships be restructured anad reformed to improve police oversight and accountability?
- specific institutional reforms that end up changing the overall landscape of policing, such as police oversight boards, civilian review boards, etc.

### civilian complaint review board (ccrb)

logic of the model
- basic assumptions that lead advocates to believe that this is a good idea
in practice:
- focus on the nyc ccrb
    - how does it work in practice 
    - report on ten cases of chokehold complaints

### civilian complaint review board model

 - intervention into police discipline 
 - no real typical model of how police discipline works 
    - varies by states, city, etc
- commonalities 
    - citizens can enter complaints against the police department
    - these complaints are investigated internally 
    - punishment is ultimately decided by the police chief 
    - final decision is usually appealable to an outside arbitrator 
    - internal panel/court will decide on the appropriate punishment 

Few people are happy with the status quo in police discipline systems. they are slow and not transparent. Oftentimes managers feel it is difficult to set standards when disciplinary decisions are so often overturned by arbitrators.

### stats:
- CCRBs oversee 11% of all police departments (approx.)
- approx. 15% of mid-sized police departments (50k-250k population)
- 51% of large police departments (250k+ population)
- ~79% of police departments whose chiefs belong to the major cities chiefs association
- Most CRBs founded between 1990-2010.

### ofer: civilian review boards 
how are CRBs supposed to reduce police misconduct?
- make it more likely that people will file complaints 
- make it more likely that valid complaints will be sustained 
- the barriers to filing complaints may deter people to file complaints in the first place
    - police-run complaint system (internal) was purposedly difficult and intimidating to deter people from filing complaints
- create independent to resolve conflicts of interests from internal investigations 
- will help increase trust 

- a perfect CRB should (according to udi ofer): 
    - membership majority nominated by outside civic groups
    - broad scope to review complaints 
    - independent investigative authority (subpoena)
    - disciplinary recommendations would be binding on the chief
        - why: police chief cannot overrule their findings, and the chief is not able to downgrade their disciplinary recommendation.
        - in NYPD-OIG report, the CRB makes a recommendation and the NYPD commissioner has historically downgraded the recommendation or not pursued punishment at all.
    - ability to audit policies and practices, not just individual complaints 
    - a secure source of funding (fixed percent of the police budget)
    - due process for police officers 
        - officers can access evidence and have the opportunity to appeal
    - public access/reporting 

