## role of courts 

### employment law  
- came up in connie rice's book. had to do with employment discrimination suits by hispanic, black, and female officers.  
-  suits related to gender discrimination, promotion and hiring.  

When we think about police reform, it's also important to thikn about employment law as a source of oversight that can end up catalyzing change in departments.  

not mentioned in lecture: 
- civil liability: varies quite a bit across the country how exposed departments are to civil liability.  
-  access that plaintiffs have to the legal system varies quite a bit.  
-  whether you have a change to file a lawsuit at all varies from one place to another.  
    -  in some places you have to prove that unreasonable force is used in that time period, not considering any actions before or after the use of force.  
-  variation in political culture  
    -  some judges, juries, etc are more sympathetic to police than other places  
-  variation in teh strength of the civil rights community.  
-  variation in settlement and payment practices  

### examples:  
-  cleveland: self insured, so it was difficult to collect compensation from the police department and city.  
-  philadelphia: 268 federal lawsuits. (2011-12). $22m paid in state & federal cases.  
-  houston: 25 federal lawsuits. (2011-12). $206,500 paid in state & federal cases.  

recourse to civil suits varies from place to place, but there are still a fair number of successful suits in each municipality. 

## some notable civil judgements against police depts:  
1. minneapolis: 2019-2021:
    - george floyd, $27m (2021)
2. chicago: 2019-2021:
3.  

## Insurance 

concern for using civil liability as an engine of change, is that ultimately the city council is not willing to structure the financial incentices, write checks to bail out police wrongdoing without forcing changes.  
in a way this is how insurance companies are a somewhat optimistic entity for organizational change.  

quite common for cities to put aside separate funds for a litigation budget.  
-  in some places, it would go back to the general fund if not used.  
-  budgeting practices might incentivize actions

tldr: city councils tend not to be aggressive in demanding changes when faced with big payouts from liability lawsuits.  
-  do not create as much incentive for change as one might expect.  

### insurance  
-  in most smaller cities, some kind of insurance company pays out the liability settlements.  
    -  in some cases, these insurance companies can encourage and incentivize change.

Private insurance companies and insurance risk pools:  
-  has claims data  
-  often involved across many cities
-  loss prevention: companies have experience across departments implementing changes that might reduce misconduct (losses for insurance companies)  
-  most of the data they need to identify promising practices is gathered as a function of their underwriting.  
-  insulated against criticism because they are a proviate business (it's a cost-benefit decision)

Notes:  
-  been around since the 1960s  
-  industry has had ups and downs.  
-  all but biggest cities usually have some kind of insurance -- through private company or insurance risk pool  
-  roughly 3/4s of police today work for a PD that's covered by an insurance provider or a risk pool.  
-  large cities (detroit, nyc) are typically self-insured.  
-  Michigan municipal league risk pool: act as an insurance pool for groups of cities.  

Almost all influenced by the logic of the private insurance industry  
-  in part because of reinsurance  


Notable civil judgements:  
1.  minneapolis 2019-21:
    -  floyd (27m)
2.  inkster, 2015
    -  dent, 1.4m
3.  chicago, 2018
    -  120m total for suits against police (~10k per officer)  

### how involved are insurance companies?  

-  risk pools staff former officers and try to intervene directly in some form or another.  

### how private insurance shapes public policing   

three different ways:  
1.  persuasion: 
    - insurers send educational brochures,
    - subsidize training, 
    - access to expensive training machinery to loan out to smaller departments.  
2.  financial incentives: underwriting involves gathering information about police practices. insurers will often send out auditors to departments to evaluate risk. 
    - discounts for departments that employ certain policing practices. 
    - discounts for accreditation (CALEA)
    - decisions that determine how the insurance companies will determine the overall price charged.
    - increasing deductibles for departments. 
    - setting line limits that put a ceiling on the amount an insurance co. will pay out for specific types of claims.  
3. denial of coverage (or threat of denial): police departments can get shut down if they have enough complaints and liability claims agains them.  
    - oakley michigan
    - 

### **even less transparent**
Note: it's not always clear how much the information gathered by insurance companies affects financial terms they are providing to cities.  

### priorities  (2023-11-02, cont'd from 2023-10-31)

there can be a mismatch between priorities of insurnace companies and the priorities of the public.

- there is some overlap pbvetween public priorities for police reform, but there is some mismatch as well 

ultimately the power insurnace companies have over police reform is powered by the power of liability suits.  
- ins. co's care about **monetizable** harm, in the civil liabilities context 
- other harms, e.g. interrogation tactics, are not as successful in terms of civil liabilities suits, so companies care less about changing harmful practices  

insurance companies want to reduce the civil liability payouts, so they have an incentive to change police practices that lead to civil liability payouts.  
on the other hand: another tactic to reduce payouts is by making it more difficult to pursue successful lawsuits.

one tactic:
- making police procedures and bright lines more vague and difficult to prove.
systematic bias: 
- less worry about underpolicing 
    -  domestic violence calls may be more difficult to police if insurance companies are too aggressive in changing tactics  
    -  example: uvalde -- police did not act and the suit against them is unlikely to be successful. 

> tldr: limits of insurance are the limits of civil liability

insurance companies bring diffuse knowledge across the country because of the reach of their business.
-  they can pick up best practices from one place and encourage their spread to other places  
but local context is important too: 
-  there is some danger to the topdown approach of insurance companies pushing reforms.  

pools: 
state leg's allowed pooling in the 80s.  
-  its an open question of whether it's possible to regulate some kind of transparency in those types of pools. 

### applications outside of policing:

-  for small and medium sized cities, there is a pretty big role for insurance companies to play 
Examples:
-  employment law: some lawyers work for insurance companies, not workers  
-  parks and rec department: civil liability is a big deal  


