IPE Reflection Paper
Francisco Brady

4. How did you/your role feel about the final outcome/decision made? Would your role’s perception of government and the Mayor’s office change as a result? Would your role participate in these types of participation activities again? Why/why not?
My role was Cesar Medina, a housing organizer working for the advocacy group ViviendaYa, agitating for housing supports and more affordable housing built in the city. I think Cesar would have had mixed feelings about the outcome. On the one hand, the decision to invest the $10 million in a small business entrepreneurship hub represented an investment in the community, but Cesar would have seen this as misguided for two principal reasons. First, he would have felt like there were too many opportunities for the funds to be misdirected towards large developers, and second, the lack of investment in affordable housing for the citizens of Guadalajara would have been a major disappointment. In addition, Cesar would have been critical of the decision because a lack of affordable housing within the city weakens the potential impact of any investments to support entrepreneurship. If you can't afford to live in the city, it's that much more difficult to participate in the economy.
I think Cesar would have opted to participate again, if only to make a more forceful case for investments into affordable housing or supports. I think perhaps his strategy would have been to work more closely with the business development group, to see if he could build a coalition that emphasized small builders and local developers, rather than large, national firms. He would have been disappointed, but not discouraged, to try to address some of the issues that he knows will persist or even worsen after any investments are made in the city.

5. Consider what you learned during your post-simulation workshop. How does what you learned influence: a) your take-aways from IPE, b) your thoughts about equity of process or outcome in government work, or c) how the participatory approaches used during the simulation might have been changed to increase equity. (Make sure to note which workshop you attended!)
I participated in the Racial Equity Impact Analysis (REIA) Workshop with Niketa Brar and Jianan Shi. We were given a presentation on the REIA process, and then we were able to participate in a simulation meant to demonstrate the process. The steps of REIA are meant to 1) Determine outcomes and stakeholders, 2) Look at numbers and narratives, 3) Measure benefits and burdens, and finally step 4) Evaluate and be accountable.
In the workshop we simulated a community group meeting, with stakeholders from the city, planning office, community organizations, and community members in attendance. The task was reviewing proposed changes to a busy intersection in a neighborhood in Chicago which had suffered pedestrian injuries and deaths. In the exercise, I was given the role of a local homeowner who had recently moved to the area.
In general I am not the most sympathetic to homeowner concerns, and I went into the simulation prepared to have multiple opportunities to voice my concerns, rail about government intrusion, and generally cause chaos. However, as we worked through the questions given on the worksheet, I noticed that the questions were helping the group to focus on the most affected members of the community, as opposed to those with the loudest voices or those with the most resources. I found that while I was able to voice my concerns, they were not given priority in the discussion, and we were able to focus the discussion on those without cars and those who were most affected by the traffic and dangerous conditions of the intersection in question. I found myself contributing ideas to the discussion about local businesses that may be hurt by proposed construction, both in terms of higher rents once improvements were made, but also by lost revenues during the phase of construction and traffic redirection.
At the end of the simulation, we went around the room and presented our recommendations. After all of the groups presented their results, our facilitators asked us to consider how the structure of the meeting influenced the outcomes. The framing of the questions we were meant to answer in the simulation directed us towards foregrounding the racial and economic impact of the proposed changes, which many groups, mine included, had not explicitly mentioned. The most impacted groups in our simulation were the Black and hispanic original residents of the community, who were being injured by the traffic, and through gentrification would be displaced by the improvements. Our facilitators challenged us to name those inequities explicitly, instead of hiding behind terms like lower-income groups or minority residents, and challenged us to not only consider the data we were given but to also consider that people's lived experience in the simulation should be taken into account as "data" in our assessments.
The community meetings that were held in the IPE simulation were not as focused on the racial and equity impacts of how to spend the grant, but I think outcomes would have improved if they had been. In IPE, all of the roles came into the process with their own agendas, while in the REIA training, we set out to intentionally explore an agreed outcome that centered racial and economic equity, and I think that had an impact on the proposals that came out of those sessions. In many ways, I think what both of these experiences impressed upon me was the work and dedication that it takes to facilitate these kinds of conversations. Balancing the need for community members, who have their own needs and motivations, with the need to elevate marginalized voices and center racial equity, is a difficult job. In my role as Cesar, I came in with a singular vision to advocate for affordable housing, but as the simulation went on, I felt that it would make sense to ally with others who were more interested in community centers, which I felt like might be able to provide emergency housing supports, such as rent assistance or vouchers. Ultimately the final proposal became unwieldy and over-engineered, before being hijacked by the big business interests anyways. I feel that if our facilitation had started out with structured questions centering racial and economic equity, we could have identified affordable housing as a prime issue and outcome that was worth working towards.
