Francisco Brady
URP 581

I. The Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Program and environmental pollution exposure
It is well established that the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) is the largest and most successful affordable housing subsidy program in the United States. The program was created by the Tax Reform Act of 1986 and has since aided in the construction of over 2.6 million units of affordable housing (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, 2018). Much research has been done on the impacts of LIHTC on the supply of affordable housing, but recently more attention has being paid to the location decisions of LIHTC developments and outcomes experienced by residents of LIHTC properties.
LIHTC properties are privately-owned and maintained, with tax credits facilitating financing for projects. As a result, LIHTC properties face the same cost constraints other developments do when making siting decisions. These siting decisions have real world impact on the opportunity available to LIHTC residents. Research has shown that LIHTC developments are disproportionately located in areas with lower levels of labor market activity, higher levels of pollution, and worse performing schools (Ellen, Horn, and Kuai, 2018). While many projects have explored the access to overall opportunity of LIHTC residents, the rest of this paper will focus on the research exploring the way that LIHTC developments and siting decisions affect exposure to environmental pollution and other neighborhood level health factors that have the potential to harm resident health.

II. How are LIHTCs affected by environmental pollution?
Placements of LIHTC developments in some contexts have been associated with positive outcomes for high poverty neighborhoods (Deng 2011). However other studies have reviewed the relationship between LIHTC development and key health indicators and found increased probability of having asthma and as being characterized as being in "Fair or Poor Health" (Gensheimer, Eisenberg, Hindman 2022). Other research has been done to examine LIHTC exposure to environmental pollution, in the context of neighborhood quality.  Ellen, Horn and Kuai (2018) use HUD Environmental Health Index, which is a linear combination of carcinogenic, respiratory, and neurological air quality hazards, among other outcome indices representing overall neighborhood quality and find that residents in LIHTC developments are located in neighborhoods with lower (worse) environmental health scores. 
The HUD Environmental Health Index is one data source that can be used to measure exposure to environmental pollution, but it is not the only one. The Risk-Screening Environmental Indicators (RSEI) data is another source that can be used to measure exposure to environmental pollution, used by Goplerud and coauthors (2022) to measure exposure to industrial air pollution.
There are several market failures involved in the difficulties of providing affordable housing and in incentivizing environmental mitigation efforts to provide more equitable access to pollution-free housing. The first is the lack of affordable housing in general, which is a result of the high cost of land and construction. Another factor contributing to the cost of building affordable housing is the requirement to meet minimum standards for housing fit for human habitation. The second market failure is the failure of the market to account for and price in the negative externalities of pollution. Pollution creates downstream costs in the form of health care costs and lost productivity, but these costs are not borne by the polluters. Bullard and co-authors (1987, 2008) documented the effects of this externality and coined the term "environmental racism" to describe the disproportionate burden of pollution on communities of color.
Minority communities and low-income communities are the most affected stakeholders, and bear the costs of exposure to environmental pollution. Chakraborty and coauthors (2022) used PM 2.5 concentrations to measure exposure to air pollution, and found that residents of public housing developments were overrepresented in neighborhoods with higher exposure to these sources of pollution which can often lead to adverse health outcomes.
Addressing pollution is a national concern, but the siting of LIHTC developments is governed most directly by state and local governments, who create and provide input for the Qualified Allocation Plans (QAPs) that determine the priorities for LIHTC developments. The lack of attention paid to environmental factors also represents a policy failure at the state level, where the QAPs are created and implemented. The impact of QAPs is discussed further in the next section.

III. Role of Qualified Allocation Plans (QAPs) in LIHTC development
The demand for Low-Income Housing Tax Credits (LIHTC) outstrips the supply granted to each state by the IRS, so a competitive process is held, with applicants sending their proposals for new developments or rehabilitation projects to the state housing finance agency (HFA). These proposals are then scored according to a Qualified Allocation Plan (QAP), which grades each project on a variety of factors, including the location of the project, the number of units, the number of bedrooms, the level of affordability, and the level of community support. Although there are some federally mandated requirements in QAPs, state HFAs are given wide latitude to tailor scoring to address their specific state housing priorities.
The outcomes of these QAP allocation cycles determine which LIHTC developments are approved, and subsequently financed and built. Research has been done to determine whether changes in QAPs impact the distribution of LIHTC projects, and the analysis has shown that changes in QAPs can affect the siting patterns of LIHTC developments. Specifically, Ellen and Horn (2017) showed that increased emphasis on opportunity areas in QAPs led to an increase in the share of tax credits awarded to projects in lower poverty areas, showing that state priorities do indeed shift development site decisions.
While Ellen and Horn (2017) found QAP priorities had impacts, less emphasis is put on environmental hazards than on locating in high opportunity areas. Ahrentzen and coauthors (2023) found that during the 2016 funding cycle, only 40% of QAPs required any sort of environmental remediation. The emphasis in QAPs on remediation highlights that construction considerations take precedence over environmental concerns. Although siting in high opportunity areas may impact the exposure of LIHTC residents to environmental pollution, it is not a priority for most state QAPs.
QAPs have been shown to have an impact on the siting of LIHTC developments, so they can be modified to take into account the issue of exposure to environmental pollution. Many QAPs now require developers to commit to a green building certification, for example, Michigan's QAP requires applications to commit to at least one green building standard QAPs could be modified to require developers to commit to a certain level of pollution abatement, or to commit to siting in areas with lower levels of pollution.

IV. Prior Research on LIHTCs and exposure to Pollution and related issues
The association between LIHTC developments and exposure to air pollution is not extensively studied. More research has been done on the impacts of indoor air quality on LIHTC and public housing tenants. Rosenbaum (2008) found that in an analysis of New York City, adjusted multilevel models showed a significant association between deteriorated household characteristics and the odds of asthma prevalence. This relationship was particularly strong among Black and Hispanic households. Focusing more on the aspects related to segregation and disparate racial impacts, Ard (2016) shows from testing 19 different models of segregation that "the most persistent and strongly predictive factor of the extent of health risk from air
toxins was whether the block group had more African-Americans living there relative to the M/PMSA average."Ard did not consider the types of housing in the block groups, but the results suggest that the racial composition of the block group is a strong predictor of exposure to air toxins.
A key study from Ellen, Horn, and Kuai obtained individual-level data on LIHTC residents in 12 states. The study included data on LIHTC developments from 2011 and 2012, and then constructed a comparable non-LIHTC rental unit based on average census-tract characteristics. The authors used measures from the HUD Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing (AFFH) dataset, which includes the HUD Environmental Health Index mentioned above, as well as an index of school quality, labor market engagement, transportation costs. The authors also construct a job proximity index to measure distance between census tracts and the nearest job center. These indices were then compared across representations of LIHTC and non-LIHTC rental units. They find that LIHTC units were located in neighborhoods with worse labor market outcomes, lower performing schools, higher rates of poverty, and worse environmental health index scores. Notably, the study also found that LIHTC developments were located in neighborhoods that scored better in terms of residents using public transportation, as well as lower transportation costs. Using more detailed demographic data, the study found that lower-income renters in LIHTC developments were associated with lower environmental health indices. Similarly, Black and Hispanic renters in LIHTC units were found to be in neighborhoods with more air pollution.
More recent research has utilized alternative data sources for estimates of environmental pollution. Goplerud, Gensheimer, Schneider, Eisenberg, Smith, and Pollack (2022) use the Risk-Screening Environmental Indicators (RSEI) data for industrial pollution. The RSEI data constructs an index based on over 700 substances including air pollutants, which is then transformed to a 0-100 scale, with higher numbers corresponding to higher levels of exposure to harmful environmental pollutants. The data is scaled to the census tract level. One benefit the authors note is that this data describes exposure to multiple toxic chemicals, rather than a single pollutant, and the releases are constructed from geographic microdata, which allows easy incorporation into other census-tract level data. In the analysis, they run a simple logistic model on the RSEI index percentile using the presence of at least one LIHTC property in the census tract as the dependent variable, adjusting for Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) fixed effects, and other covariates (urban setting, housing market characteristics, income and demographic statistics). The estimates suggest that LIHTC tracts in metropolitan areas are exposed to 1.7 percentile points higher industrial air pollution than non-LIHTC tracts. Compared with non-LIHTC tracts, LIHTC tracts had more Black residents, Hispanic residents, and the average rate of poverty in LIHTC tracts was 20.4%, a greater rate than the non-LIHTC tracts.
Another large study by Chakraborty, Collins, Grineski, and Aun (2022) used outdoor PM 2.5 concentrations from the Center for Air, Climate and Energy Solutions (CACES) and combined that data with HUD data on assisted public housing locations in 2015. Their results suggest "PM2.5 concentrations are significantly greater (p < 0.05) in tracts characterized by higher percentages of non-Hispanic Black residents, people with disabilities, female-headed households, and individuals below poverty", even after adjusting for spatial clustering and other demographic factors associated with PM 2.5 exposure. The authors also note that the results are consistent with other studies that have found that public housing residents are disproportionately exposed to environmental pollution. Although this study does not focus on LIHTC developments, it does show that residents of public housing are exposed to higher levels of environmental pollution, and LIHTC developments could be located in similar neighborhoods.

V. Policy Recommendations
The research above and other studies have shown that LIHTC developments are disproportionately sited in lower opportunity neighborhoods, and that LIHTC residents are exposed to higher levels of environmental pollution. Research has also shown that QAPs can affect the location decisions of LIHTC developers. Researchers have offered a number of policy suggestions to address these issues. Ellen, Horn, and Kuai (2017) emphasizes the importance of QAPs and suggest that more attention be paid to the interaction between QAP priorities and LIHTC siting patterns. They also note the sometimes competing directionality of QAP goals, such as access to transportation and access to quality schools and low levels of pollution, which was higher in non-LIHTC neighborhoods. More importantly, they find in MSAs with higher levels of segregation, Black LIHTC households experience higher poverty rates and wider gaps in environmental health indices, when compared to below median segregation MSAs.
Other policy suggestions approach the issue from the developer side. Shi, Samuels and Pollack (2017) suggest that in order to improve health outcomes among LIHTC residents, community health institutions and insurers should consider directly supporting the development of LIHTC projects by providing financing or purchasing the tax credits. As an example, they cite UnitedHealthcare, which has facilitated over "$240 million in financing since 2011 for 26 housing development projects in 14 states, creating more than 1300 affordable housing units."
Goplerud and coauthors (2022) suggest that changes can be made to QAP, requiring developers to provide assessments of neighborhood conditions where new LIHTC developments are proposed, and taking neighborhood pollution exposure into consideration when scoring applications. In addition, they note that while HUD-funded projects require compliance with certain environmental standards, since LIHTC projects are administered by the Department of the Treasury (IRS), these compliance rules may not necessarily apply. Some states have added requirements for their own environmental assessments, but those could be strengthened to consider neighborhood exposure to industrial air pollution, as opposed to only considering the environmental impact of the development itself and green building standards.
Amending priorities in QAPs would benefit residents of new LIHTC developments being considered for financing. The obvious drawback to these changes is that they might impact the overall costs of construction and development of LIHTC properties, which could lead to fewer units being built in order to maintain affordability. As suggested by Shi and coauthors, opportunities exist for state HFAs to acknowledge the interactions between affordable housing and health outcomes. Some small pilots have shown promise in integrating healthcare models and supportive housing in LIHTC sites. A program in Vermont that combined housing-plus-services for Medicare enrolled residents showed a decrease in the growth rate of per-beneficiary-per-month Medicare expenditures (Kandilov 2018), suggesting that there could be benefits from an increased focus on health outcomes in LIHTC developments.

VI. Conclusion
Among the research studies highlighted above, the key findings are that LIHTC developments are disproportionately located in neighborhoods with higher levels of environmental pollution, and other neighborhood characteristics that make equal access to opportunity difficult for residents. One of the most important mechanisms for influencing the siting patterns for LIHTC developments are the state QAPs, which are used to score and rank applications for LIHTC financing. Analysis has shown that changes in QAPs influence locational decisions for LIHTC applications, and encouraging state HFAs to consider environmental pollution in their QAPs could lead to better outcomes for LIHTC residents. Additional research on incorporating health outcomes with affordable housing has shown potential to decrease medical expenditure growth. Exposure to environmental pollution can exacerbate health issues such as asthma and other medical issues, and integrating pollution exposure considerations, along with priority on creating access to opportunity for LIHTC residents in QAPs could lead to more equitable LIHTC siting decisions.
The research suggests that the status quo should not be maintained; there are opportunities to integrate public health goals with affordable housing, which could lead to better health outcomes for LIHTC residents. State HFAs should consider incorporating environmental pollution exposure into their QAPs.

References:
Ard, K. (2016). By all measures: an examination of the relationship between segregation and health risk from air pollution. Population & Environment, 38, 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11111-015-0251-6
Sherry Ahrentzen, Lynne Dearborn, Ali Momen-Heravi & Arezou Sadoughi (2023) Shaping a Healthier LIHTC Housing Stock: Examining the Role of States’ Qualified Allocation Plans, Housing Policy Debate, 33:5, 1206-1227, DOI: 10.1080/10511482.2022.2086896
Bullard, R. D., Mohai, P., Saha, R., & Wright, B. (2007). Toxic wastes and race at twenty: a report prepared for the United Church of Christ Justice & Witness Ministries. United Church of Christ.
Chakraborty, J., Collins, T.W., Grineski, S.E. et al. (2022). Air pollution exposure disparities in US public housing developments. Scientific Reports, 12, 9887. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-13942-3
Deng, L. (2011). Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Developments and Neighborhood Change: A Case Study of Miami-Dade County. Housing Studies, 26(6), 867-895. https://doi.org/10.1080/02673037.2011.593130
Ellen, I. G., Horn, K. M., & Kuai, Y. (2018). Gateway to Opportunity? Disparities in Neighborhood Conditions Among Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Residents. Housing Policy Debate, 28(4), 572-591. https://doi.org/10.1080/10511482.2017.1413584
Ellen, I. G., & Horn, K. M. (2018). Points for Place: Can State Governments Shape Siting Patterns of Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Developments? Housing Policy Debate, 28(5), 727-745. https://doi.org/10.1080/10511482.2018.1443487
Gensheimer, S. G., Eisenberg, M. D., Hindman, D., Wu, A. W., & Pollack, C. E. (2022). Examining Health Care Access And Health Of Children Living In Homes Subsidized By The Low-Income Housing Tax Credit. Health Affairs, 41(6), 883-892.
Goplerud, D. K., et al. (2022). The Spatial Relationship Between the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Program and Industrial Air Pollution. Cityscape, 24(3), 183–212. JSTOR, https://www.jstor.org/stable/48707851
Kandilov, A., et al. (2018). The Impact of the Vermont Support and Services at Home Program on Healthcare Expenditures. Cityscape, 20(2), 7-18. https://proxy.lib.umich.edu/login?url=https://www.proquest.com/scholarly-journals/impact-vermont-support-services-at-home-program/docview/2117114652/se-2
Rosenbaum, E. (2008). Racial/Ethnic Differences in Asthma Prevalence: The Role of Housing and Neighborhood Environments. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 49(2), 131-145. https://doi.org/10.1177/002214650804900202
Shi, M., Samuels, B. A., & Pollack, C. E. (2017). Low-Income Housing Tax Credit: Optimizing Its Impact on Health. American Journal of Public Health, 107(10), 1586-1588.
US Department of Housing and Urban Development. (2020). Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing Data and Mapping Tool (AFFH-T) Data Documentation. Retrieved from https://www.hud.gov/sites/dfiles/FHEO/documents/AFFH-T-Data-Documentation-AFFHT0006-July-2020.pdf

