## 2024-09-16

Count Models

### outline
1. prelims
2. poisson models
3. negative binomial models
4. zero-inflated models
5. hurdle models

### count models 

- dependent variable is a count of the number of times something happens during a specified period of time
- for example, the number of coups during a decade or the number of supreme court appointments during a presidency
- oftentimes these data have a high positive skewness with a lot of observations at 0.
- OLS can have biased standard errors and incorrect significance tests under these circumstances
- we can use a probability distribution over a discrete outcomes instead.

### estimation techniques for count data

- to estimate this count as a function of some set of independent variables, we can use the poisson or binomial distribution
- when the events of interest happen rarely, the poisson distribution works well. it approximates the binomial under these conditions.
- when the dispersion of the count data is large, a negative binoimal distribution works better than a poisson.
- when the number of zeros in the data is very high, techniques such as zero-inflated poisson might be more appropriate.

### example: malaria cases in a household

- nkegbe and kuunibe (2019) case study using a count model to examine the relationship between poverty and malaria.
- research from the jirapa district in the upper west reason of ghana. 200 households selected through multi-stage sampling.
- the unit of analysis is the household, since there is a range of factors operating at the household level.
- e.g. socioeconomic factors, location, use of mosquito nets, applications of insecticides, etc.
- the number of malaria cases is a count: a non-negative integer that is **not** normally distributed across households.

### independent variables
- education level: for head of household (none, basic, secondary, tertiary). category dummies.
- poverty situation: based on income of household head (poor, lower-middle, upper-middle, non-poor). category dummies.
- sex: gender in article. dichotomous where 1=male
- age: years for head of household
- marital status: categorical (married, separated, widowed, never married, divorced). unclear how coded for the model.
- household size: number of people in the household

### Estimation methods
- poisson model (basic) and generalized poisson model
- the possion distribution is a discrete probability distribution
- it is used to model the number of events that occur during a particular period of time
    - if the mean of this outcome > 10, OLS is probably fine.
- Key Assumption: the mean and variance of the distribution are equal. Violations result in under/overdispersion.
- the generalized poisson relaxes this assummption to allow for both under and overdispersion.
    - there is underdispersion in this case: variance < mean.

### interpretation
- the sign of the coefficients give the direction of the effect of the variable on the number of malaria cases in the household.
- cannot directly interpret the magnitude of the effects withouth doing the predicted probabilities and marginal effects.
- as always for MLE, the values for all the independent variables matter.
- the significant, negative estimate for $\theta^b$ indicates that there is underdispersion. the generalized model is then appropriate.

### the poisson distribution
- let $y_i$ be the number of times we observe the outcome of interest. suppose $y_i$ has a poisson distribution with mean $\lambda$.
$$
y_i = f(\lamba, y_i) = \frac{e^{-\lambda}\lambda^{y_i}}{y_i!}
$$

- this function reports the probability we will observe the outcome of interest $y_i$ times.
- the parameter $\lambda$ is the rate of event occurence during the time period. This is called the intensity parameter. thus it is also the expected number of events.

### Key assumptions for using poisson

- the average time between events is known. exact timing between events is random.
- assumes all events are independent. occurence of one event should not affect the probability of the next event.
- time periods are even.
- homogeneity of the process: events occur randomly and with uniform probability in time.
- the mean and variance of the number of the events are equal. violation of this assumption produces under- or overdispersion.

### the likelihood function:

$$
L = \frac{e^{\lambda}\lambda^{\y_1}}{y_1!} X \frac{e^{\lambda}\lambda^{\y_2}}{y_2!} X ... X \frac{e^{\lambda}\lambda^{\y_n}}{y_n!} \\
= \prod_{i=1}^{n} \frac{e^{-\lambda}\lambda^{y_n}}{y_n!}
$$

This makes the log of the likelihood function:

$$
lnL = \sum_{i=1}^{n} ln(\frac{e^{-\lambda}\lambda^{y_n}}{y_n!}) 
$$

We can parameterize $\lambda$ as exp($x_i\beta$) and then estimate the parameter vector $\beta$ that makes the observed $y_i$'s most likely.

### using software to estimate a poisson

- stata: `poisson y x1 x2 x3`
-r: `model <- glm(y ~ x1 + x2 + x3, family = "poisson", data = data)`

### problem with OLS
- this is called "Restricted Support"
- the high number of 0's restricts the support for identifying the slope.
- we get predicted values that are negative
- the OLS residuals will be non-normal and heteroskedastic, so standard error estimates will be biased.

(see lecture slides for example of interpretation and predicted values)

