## 2024-09-18

## Too Many Zeros

- Sometimes our sample has "too many" zeros
- This causes problems because Poisson and Negative Binomial models will underpredict the outcome of 0.
- We might believe this situation results from our sample containing two clases (i.e. types):
    1. "Always zero" cases in which a non-zero outcome is not really a possibility.
    2. Cases in which 0 just happened to be the count for that period.

- The problem is that we don't know for certain which cases are in which class (i.e. subpopulation)

Note: If you have a lot of zeros, you might be tempted to run a zero inflted model, but this needs to be supported by theory.

### Zero-Inflated Models

- This approach assumes the existence of these two classes and models them with different distributions.
- The expected count is 0 with the probability of 1 for those of the "excess zeros" class.
- The expected count is modeled with a Poisson or Negative Binomial distribution for the other class.
- We need a variable to help us predict which class the cases belong to.
- this prediction is used to get better predicted counts for the cases where non-zero values were more probable.

### some of the details
- we would like to know whether or not an observed 0 belongs to the "always zero" class.
- the method uses either a logit or probit to estimate the probability that each case belongs to this category.
- call the probability $F_i$. Then $1-F_i$ is the probability that the case belongs to the other class (non-zeros).
- Thus, $F_i$ serves as a weight: how much importace to assign a particular case when estimating the coefficients.

### Somem of the math (e.g. Poisson)

From the above, we get:

$$
y_i = 0 \text{ with probability } F_i
y_i \sim Poisson(\lambda_i) \text{ with probability } 1-F_i
$$

Let's $Z_i$'s be the variables used to predict $F_i$ and $X_i$'s be used to predict a count. Then:

$$
Pr(y_i = 0) = F_i + (1-F_i)exp{-\lambda_i} \\
Pr(y_i = n|x_i, z_i) = (1-F_i) \frac{exp(\lambda_i)\lambda_i^n}{n!} \text{ for all } n > 0
$$

The probability that a count is zero is the sum of the probability a case belongs in the always-zero class and the probability that it's count is zero if in the potential non-zero class.

### Predicting the "Excess Zeros" Group

- We need information that helps us predict whether a case belongs in the class that will be zero no matter what.
- This predictor, or set of predictors, is used with a logit function to obtain an estimated probability.

### Run a Zero-Inflated Poisson Model

Stata: 
```stata
zip y x1 x2 x3, inflate(z1)
```

R:
```r
zeroinfl(y ~ x1 + x2 + x3 | z1, data = mydata)
```

(See slides for model output)

### Interpretation

- the first set of coefficients are for the Poisson model. the second set are for the logit model.
- the signs on the coefficients gives us the direction of the effects.
    - a negative coefficient indicates that the higher the value of the predictor, the lower the expected count.
    - a positive coefficient indicates that the higher the value of the predictor, the higher the expected count.

### zero-inflated negative binomial
- suppose we have over-dispersion as well as believe there is a class of "always zeros." A zero-inflated negative binomial is an option.
- the basic format is the same as the Poisson model, but the distribution is different.
Stata:
```stata
zinb y x1 x2 x3, inflate(z1)
```
Where the variable inside the parentheses is used to predict membership in the always-zero class.
R:
```r
zeroinfl(y ~ x1 + x2 + x3 | z1, dist = "negbin", data = mydata)
```

(See slides for results)





