## 2024-01-16 

### unit 1: taxes and big concepts 
calendar: 
- last week: why study public econ 
- today: empirical tools
- thursday: fiscal policy 
- next week: taxes!

### lies versus statistics 
(wolfers and stevenson)
- look for many good studies all pointing to the same conclusions 
- statistical significance is about the strength of the evidence, not it's importance 
- high powered statistical techniques can be misleading. more data or fancier tools are not necessarily better
- empirical findings aren't right or wrong, they are helpful or unhelpful in moving us towards the truth
- correlation helps explain the world, but in policy we care about making change, so we need causation
- empirical findings may accurately describe what happened in one situation, but does it help explain what will happen in other contexts? (external validity)

- marginal value of public funding: the value of the next dollar spent on a program

### empiricism is the current practice of economics
- 2019 nobel prize in economics: abhijit banerjee, esther duflo, michael kremer
    - "for their experimental approach to alleviating global poverty"
- 2021 nobel prize in economics: david card, josh angrist, guido imbens
    - natural experiments help answer important questions for society
    - many of the big questions in the social sciences deal with cause and effect
        - how does immigration affect pay and employment levels?
        - how does a longer education affect someone's future income?
    - these questions are difficult to answer because we have nothing to use as a comparison. we do not know what would have happened if there had been less immigration or if that person had not continued studying.

### empirics and economicd development:
- huge rise in empirical papers over the last 30 years.

### introduction
- empirical public finance is the use of data and statistical methodoloes to measure the impact of government policy on individuals and markets. 
- the gfoal: disentanlge correlation and causal effects

### the problem:
- problem: an attempt to interpret a correlation as a causal relationship, without sugfficient thought to the underlgying data generating process.
- for anyt correlation between two variables an and b, there are four possible explanations for a correlation: 
    - A is causing b
    - b is causing A 
    - some other factor is causing both 
    - there is a spruious correlation between the two.

### correlation versuys caudation
- for poliucy, what we care about is causation.
- knowing that two factors are correlation gives you no predictive power
- what we do: run a natural experiment. 

### measuring causation
- the gold standard of causation is a randomized control trial (RCT)
- trial proceeds by taking a group of volunteers and randomly assigning them to a treatment group and a control group
- with random assignment, the only difference between the two groups is the treatment
- as a result, the treatment group is identical to the control group in every way except for the treatment

### without random assignment we can get bias!!!!
- bias represents any systematic difference between the treatment and control groups, that is correlatied with the treatment, but not due to the treatment
- we call this omitted variable bias or selection bias
Example: SAT tutoring - students who choose to take SAT tutoring are more likely to be need the training, so the students who take the training will have lower scores than the students who do not take the training.

### in the real world, we use observational data
- observational data is data that is not generated by a randomized control trial, data generated from individuals observed in the real world.

Four main approaches:
1. time series analysis: observe trends over time
2. ctoss-sectional regression analysis: control for what you can
3. quasi-experiments: create situations analogous to experiments
4. structural modeling: use data to see theoretical models

### examplke: sports participation and life achievement
- people who play sports in high school earn higher wages later in life
    - there's also a rights-based reason for why gov't would intervene in sports participation
possibilities:
    - participarting in sports changes people causing them to earn higher wages down the line: causation
    - people who participate in sports are the type of people who would have done well in life anyway: (OVB:    omitted variable bias)
    - people doing well in sports are the only ones with time for sports
causation versus signaling:
    - sports participation is a signal of other characteristics that lead to higher wages
    - the correlation may be driven by an unobserved third factor

### time series analysis
- time series analysis documents correlation between variables of interest over time
    - 1972 congress enacted legislation that provided a mandate against gender discrimination in sports participation
    - virtually no womemn played HS sports at the time
    - today over a third of girls play sports in HS 
    - was this change caused by policy?

> Title IX: "No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance."
    - passed in 1972 and states are given until 1978 to comply
    - strengthened in 1989

### was it the change in law that increased female sports participation? or something else?
- were these changes due to the law, or due to changing social norms that would have happened regardless of the law?

### cross-sectional regression analysis
- takes correlation further by finding the line that best fits the data
- describes the relationship between the dependent variable and the independent variable
- "cross-sectional" means comparing many individuals at one point in time
- one advantage of regression is ability to include control variables, that is, other factors that may affect the dependent variable
- but the potential for omitted variable bias makes it difficult to establish causation
- a regression is just quantifying a correlation UNLESS you can account for everything

### to see if playing sports causes higher wages:
- we want to run: 
$$
wage_i,s,t = \alpha + \beta (Athletic Opportunity)_i,s,t + \epsilon_i,s,t
$$

### HS athletes earn more

- male athlese earn 19% more than non-athletes and women athletes earn 14% more.
    - BUT MUCH OF THIS IS DUE TO THE FACT THAT ATHLESE ARE DIFFERENCT FROM NON ATHLETES
    - adding controls reduces this percentage

### quasi-experiments
- changes in the environment that create roughyl identical treatment and comparison groups 

Methods:
1. regression discontinuity design: compare individuals just above and just below a threshold
2. difference-in-differences: compare changes in outcomes for a treatment group and a control group before and after a policy change.
3. synthetic control: compare a treated unit to a weighted average of similar untreated units
4. instrumental variables: use a variable that is correlated with the treatment, but not the outcome, to isolate the effect of the treatment

### difference-in-differences
focus in public finance and public policy research because of the ability to compare outcomes before and after a policy change in specific localities and not in others.

### quasi-experiments
- history: john snow and the cholera outbreak in london
    - Snow 1855, studied whether cholera was spread through the water supply by examining variation in water company
    identifying assumption: which company you used is randomlly determined.

### difference-in-differences
- estimator: taking the difference between the changes in outcomes for the treatment group that experiences an intervention and the control group that does not.
- difference-in-difference estimators combine the advantages of cross-sectional regression analysis and time series analysis.

### problems with quasi-experiments
- possible states increased girls participation more than others because of other factors 
- states can be changing differently for other reasons
- we can never be completely certain that we have purged treatment-control comparisons of bias

### can we uses title ix in a difference-in-difference framework?
- is there a quasi-experiment to study the effects of sports participation on later life outcomes?
- title ix was an "exogenous" shock to access to sports for the generation of women following passage.
    - can we compare before and after 
    - can we get more variation
    - title ix requires states to provide the same access to girls as is provided to boys.

### finding the second difference
- individual states varied dramatically in terms of the participation rates of boys
    - states with higher levels of boys participation needed more dramatic change in order to be in compliance with title ix.

### are we there yet
- diff 1: change before and after the policy 
- difference 2: change across groups 

### instrumental variables
- isolate the exogenous part of the policy change 
- instrumental variable 
    - a variable that is correlated with the treatment, but does not solely determine the assignment
    - **must** not be correlated with the error term

### diff-in-diff to instrumental variables (IV)
- stevenson 2006






