Introduction:
Court-ordered involuntary treatment (CIT) for individuals experiencing severe mental illness (SMI), should not be considered seriously until good faith efforts have been made to adequately fund existing community mental health resources and other resources addressing social determinants of health. It is the lack of access to these resources which exacerbates situations involving SMI individuals. The ethical tension between the negative right to individual autonomy and the state's obligation to protect its citizens surrounding this debate is resolved by the alternative, which is adequate and continued investment in community mental health resources.

In their Guest Commentary[^1], Dr. Lewis passionately describes the tragic consequences of untreated severe mental illness. However, her support for CIT omits a crucial detail. When empathetically describing the pain of seeing the same patients time after time, she says: "We start the cycle again when they are admitted to the hospital, are treated, get better, and are deemed stabilized enough for discharge."  The question which CIT proponents avoid is where SMI individuals are discharged *to*. The lack of a warm handoff of these individuals to supportive services, like help in finding a stable home, or help filling their prescriptions, all of which would help them maintain treatment and stability, is a missing link in caring for these individuals in a way that respects their autonomy and rights. Notably, Maryland is one of only 17 states that has no plans to recognize Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinics (CCBHCs)[^2], which are designed to provide comprehensive mental health services to individuals with SMI. This is a critical gap in the system that should be addressed before considering CIT.

As noted above, there are alternatives to CIT which respect the individual right to autonomy while increasing access to services which can aid individuals struggling with SMI. Before resorting to involuntary measures, Maryland should prioritize investments in the following programs:
-  Intensive community support programs: Offering wraparound support services like housing assistance, case management, and vocational training can empower individuals to manage their illness on their own terms.
- Enhanced access to voluntary treatment: Removing access barriers, such as affordability and stigma, can encourage SMI individuals to seek help on their own terms. In a segment on 60 Minutes, Marquesha Babers described the difficulty she faced finding a therapist to help with her mental health issues, which include bipolar disorder, and being told the wait would be six months. When asked if she could access the medication she needed, she responded that volunteer services that could help her were backed up[^3]. Increasing funding to these services is the kind of preventative investment that should be prioritized.
- Early intervention and prevention programs: Adequately funding community clinics that promote emotional well-being, and teach coping skills, and develop relationships with patients can intervene before mental health challenges escalate.
- Continued funding for community mental health services: Expanding access to quality mental healthcare, including therapy, social work services, and peer support groups, empowers individuals to manage their illness and thrive.
- Culturally competent care: Addressing the unique needs of diverse communities through culturally tailored services and providers fosters trust and improves engagement with the healthcare system.
- Addressing social determinants of mental illness: Poverty, housing insecurity, and trauma can exacerbate mental health challenges. Investing in social programs and addressing these upstream factors can allow those suffering from SMI a stable place to receive treatment and support.
These approaches comprise an alternative to the binary that is offered by CIT proponents, either involuntary treatment or the status quo. They respect the rights of people with SMI, while decreasing the likelihood of harm to themselves or others.

[1^]: [Doctor: Maryland needs assisted outpatient treatment so I can save my patients.](https://www.marylandmatters.org/2023/04/07/doctor-maryland-needs-assisted-outpatient-treatment-so-i-can-save-my-patients/)
[2^]: [How do States Deliver, Administer, and Integrate Behavioral Health Care? Findings from a Survey of State Medicaid Programs](https://www.kff.org/mental-health/issue-brief/how-do-states-deliver-administer-and-integrate-behavioral-health-care-findings-from-a-survey-of-state-medicaid-programs/)
[3^]: [California's controversial CARE Court brings mental health care into the courtroom](https://www.cbsnews.com/news/care-court-california-mental-illness-courtroom-plan-60-minutes-transcript/)
CIT Arguments:
Supporters of court-ordered involuntary treatment argue that while it may be true that the rights of individuals are curtailed, there is a compelling interest, the policies are highly targeted to that end. However, as described in the 60 Minutes segment, the CARE courts in California are authorized compell people into conservatorship, which is an extreme infringement on someones rights. There have been several high-profile cases of conservatorship abuse (Britney!). As detailed above, the focus on individuals to the exclusion of systemic reform is a critical flaw in the CIT approach. The state should be investing in community mental health resources and other resources addressing social determinants of health, not in expanding involuntary treatment options.
Conclusion:
While seeking solutions to address the needs of individuals with severe mental illness is crucial, prioritizing court-ordered involuntary treatment risks violating fundamental ethical principles. Investing in comprehensive, accessible, and voluntary mental healthcare services, alongside robust community clinics and wraparound services, including help with addressing other social determinants of health, represents a more just and ethically sound approach. This approach affirms the state's obligation to both protect the safety of its citizens and uphold individual rights. Let us explore solutions that prioritize funding existing community health solutions, promote well-being, and ensure everyone receives the care they need.