Francisco Brady
Memo 3

Working in public service often comes with many rules and regulations that detail the correct approach to various processes, however, there can be some cases which a public employee may face when they are confronted with a situation that is not properly accounted for by the rules. In these cases, employees sometimes must use their discretion to come to the right course of action. In other cases, they may be confronted with unethical, or illegal behavior and the employee must decide along several factors what their obligation is to the public, to their employer, and themselves. This memo will explore the ethical dilemma faced by Peter Buxtun, a US Public Health Service employee who brought public attention to the Tuskegee Syphilis Study, and discuss the ethical considerations of his decision to publicize the study.
The Tuskegee Study was a research project conducted by the U.S. Public Health Service from 1932 to 1972, in which African American males were denied treatment for syphilis to study the natural progression of the disease. Even though at the time of the study no laws were being broken, the implementation of the Tuskegee Syphilis Study was morally wrong, operating on racist assumptions about the value of the subjects. Participants were recruited without informed consent, and deceived about the true nature of the research. The revelation of the study led to significant changes in research ethics and public health policy in the United States, beginning with the National Research Act of 1974, and the Belmont Report, which established the guidelines for ethical human subject research in the United States (Muscente, 2020).  

The Tuskegee Study aimed to observe the progression and impacts of untreated syphilis. At the time the standard treatments for the disease were arsenic-based compounds, which were toxic and ineffective. The study was conducted in Macon County, Alabama, and involved 600 African American males, 399 of whom had syphilis, while 201 were used as controls (Tobin, 2022). The participants were told they would receive free medical care, hot meals, and burial insurance, and that they were being treated for "bad blood," a term used locally to describe various illnesses. The study was supposed to last six months, but it continued for 40 years.
Peter Buxtun was a venereal disease tracker at the U.S. Public Health Service in San Francisco in the 1960s. According to Buxtun, one day he overheard a discussion between two other colleagues about a patient in Alabama suffering from syphilis who was taken by his family to a doctor. The doctor treated the patient with penicillin and was subsequently contacted and reprimanded by investigators at the Public Health Service. The doctor had treated one of the study participants (Hornblum 2021). The episode prompted Buxtun to investigate the study, he requested and was sent more information about the study from the CDC headquarters, and approached his superiors with his concerns (Elliott, 2017). While penicillin was discovered as an effective treatment for syphilis in 1943, the Tuskegee study would run for another 30 years.
Buxtun raised his concerns with his superiors at the Public Health Service, but his complaints were dismissed. He contacted the CDC and the Associated Press to expose the study. His whistleblowing efforts led to the termination of the study in 1972 and the establishment of new regulations for human research (Elliott, 2017)
When Buxtun initially raised concerns about the Tuskegee Study, he faced resistance from his superiors and colleagues. After receiving the requested study reports from the CDC, Buxtun prepared a report on his appraisal of the study and made comparisons to the experiments Nazi scientists conducted on unwilling prisoners during World War II. He showed his supervisor, who was reluctant to cause issues. Many feared professional repercussions or damage to their careers. Buxtun sent his report outlining the ethical violations of the study but received no response. After a second letter, he was summoned to Atlanta in March 1967, where he met with one of the study investigators, Dr. John Cutler, and Dr. William Brown, the head of the Venereal Disease Division at the CDC, and was told to drop the matter (Tobin, 2022).
When the Tuskegee Study began, there were no ethical standards for human research, but as early as 1907 medical experts knew that informed consent of the study population was a best practice for medical research. After the full revelation of the extent of human trials conducted by Nazi doctors during World War II, the Nuremberg Code was established in 1947, which outlined the principles of informed consent and voluntary participation in medical research. The Codes stipulate that "the voluntary consent of the human subject is absolutely essential" and that "the experiment should be such as to yield fruitful results for the good of society, unprocurable by other methods or means of study, and not random and unnecessary in nature" (UNC, N.D.). The Tuskegee Study violated these principles, and Buxtun's letter to the CDC made this connection explicit. The continuation of the study after a known treatment for syphilis was discovered made the study unnecessary. The fact that all of the participants were poor Black sharecroppers recasts the decision in a racial light. From their actions, the researchers showed that they did not value the lives of the participants, given one of the conditions of participation was consenting to an autopsy after death (Tobin 2022).
Peter Buxtun's decision to go to the press with the information about the Tuskegee Study is an example of making an ethical decision in the face of institutional pressure. Buxtun's superiors warned against him raising his concerns. Other employees at the Public Health Service were aware of the study, but either not bothered or were able to compartmentalize their knowledge of the study from their ethical selves away from work. No parts of the study were illegal, and the study was not a secret, having already published several papers on the progress of the test subjects, with the first in 1936 (Tobin, 2022). The study was sanctioned by the institution and the moral justification for the study was specific to the context of medical research. This type of logic, where individuals adopt different moral positions based on their roles or responsibilities, is explored in Arthur Applbaums' "Ethics for Adversaries". Applbaum describes role morality, which he defines as the moral standards that are specific to a particular role or job (Applbaum, 1993). In the case of the Tuskegee Study, the researchers were under the obligation to conduct the study as it was designed and not to question the ethics of the enterprise. Buxtun, however, was not able to separate his personal ethics from his role morality and felt compelled to act on his concerns. This is in line with Applbaum's examples of Northern judges who did not enforce the Fugitive Slave Act.
For the principal investigators of the Tuskegee Syphilis Study, such as Dr. John Cutler, the experiment was in line with their objectives to advance science. In addition to working to advance the science, the researchers also held deeply racist attitudes. These racist attitudes played into their rationale for continuing the study. Once a treatment was discovered, the continuation of the study was justified because valuable information would come from the study of the development of the disease. In particular the results from Tuskegee were intended as a comparison to a 1910 study of untreated syphilis in Oslo. The difference: when a treatment was discovered, the study was terminated (Tobin, 2022). There can be no doubt that racist attitudes towards the study population played a part in how the study recruited volunteers, as well as the decision to continue the study long past the time when an effective treatment was available for the disease. The investigators were able to adopt different moral positions than what they would normally adhere to, as they were able to justify their actions based on the goals of the study.
When Buxtun decided to hand over the information on the Tuskegee study to a reporter for the Associated Press, he was acting as a whistleblower, although that term was not as common at the time. Since he was no longer working for the Public Health Service, he was not in danger of retaliation from his employer. However, even after a career change, he felt compelled to speak up about the study, and the result was a front-page story in the New York Times, a congressional investigation, and eventually the passage of the National Research Act. The findings from that investigation are compiled in the Belmont Report, which outlines the ethical principles and guidelines for human research. The report was published in 1979 and is still used today as a guideline for research ethics. The report outlines three principles: respect for persons, beneficence, and justice. The Tuskegee Study violated all three of these principles, and the regulations that followed were designed to prevent future abuses of human research subjects  (Muscente, 2020).
Ultimately, Buxtun's actions were effective in bringing the Tuskegee Study to public attention and leading to its termination. He made his decision to go to the press after multiple attempts to raise his concerns with his superiors. He only made this decision after he was rebuffed in person by the study leads. His actions were ultimately successful in exposing the unethical practices of the study and leading to changes in research ethics. 
	Peter Buxtun’s decision to bring the Tuskegee Syphilis Study to the attention of the 1970s press was a pivotal moment in bringing about more transparent practices in the study of public health. Notably, Buxtun did not have a public health background–he trained as a social worker–and may explain why he was comfortable continuing to voice his objections against the wishes of much more senior public health officials and doctors (Elliot, 2017). It is possible that his social work training allowed him to recognize the severity of denying treatment to the study participants, a case of utilizing the “wrong” ethics for the role. Whatever the case, the moral calculus that drove Buxtun to persist in his efforts to bring the study to light were successful, despite great institutional pressure to remain silent. The Tuskegee case serves as a reminder of the necessity for ethical vigilance, especially in fields like public health and medical research where human lives and well-being are at stake. Public servants must be willing to uphold moral and ethical principles even in the face of institutional inertia or resistance.
Today, institutional review boards, informed consent requirements and strict ethical guidelines govern any studies involving human participants. However, ethical lapses can still occur which is why it remains critical for researchers, medical professionals, and public health officials to maintain the highest standards of moral integrity. The 50th anniversary of the revelation of the Tuskegee Study in 2022 was overshadowed by a much more notorious anniversary–that of the Watergate Scandal that led to the resignation of Richard Nixon. Mark Felt made a different decision to act on his ethical principles in that case, showing that the moral dilemmas faced by public servants can be addressed in multiple ways.

References:
1. Breed, A. G. (2022, July 25). How an AP reporter broke the Tuskegee syphilis story. Associated Press. Retrieved from https://apnews.com/article/tuskegee-study-experiment-syphilis-7743bd8c7d51fe0ef9a855b4bec69b1f

2. Elliott, C. (2017, December 4). Tuskegee Truth Teller. The American Scholar. Retrieved from https://theamericanscholar.org/tuskegee-truth-teller/

3. Gainty, C. (2024, January 12). What Newly Digitized Records Reveal About the Tuskegee Syphilis Study. Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved from https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/what-newly-digitized-records-reveal-about-the-tuskegee-syphilis-study-180983568/

4. Hornblum, A. M. (2021, January 31). The Jewish VD Detective Who Exposed the Infamous Tuskegee Experiment. Tablet Magazine. https://www.tabletmag.com/sections/history/articles/peter-buxtun-tuskegee-experiment

5. Muscente, Kailee Kodama. (2020, August 3). "The History of the Belmont Report." Teachers College, Columbia University Institutional Review Board Blog. Retrieved from https://www.tc.columbia.edu/institutional-review-board/irb-blog/2020/the-history-of-the-belmont-report/

6. Tobin, M. J. (2022, May 15). Fiftieth Anniversary of Uncovering the Tuskegee Syphilis Study: The Story and Timeless Lessons. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 205(10), 1145-1158. DOI: 10.1164/rccm.202201-0136SO. PMID: 35500908; PMCID: PMC9872801.

7. UNC Office of Human Research Ethics. "Nuremberg Code." UNC Office of Human Research Ethics. URL: https://research.unc.edu/human-research-ethics/resources/ccm3_019064/PMC9872801.
