## 2024-08-29

### Study Designs

- When you start researching you should start with a research question.
- e.g. does smoking cause lung cancer?
- think about what type of data you want to collect so that it helps you to answer your specific scientific question.
- where you get the data is very important, because you want to get the right data to answer your question.
- Sometimes you can collect your own data, sometimes you can use publicly available data.

in this lecture, we'll look at some classic study designs and determine the design used in recent publications.
- this is a short introduction to study designs, but there is a whole course on this topic.

### The Research Process (simplified)
1. develop a scientific question
2. collect data -- sometimes collect your own data, sometimes use publicly available data
3. analyze data
4. make conclusions about scientific question

sometimes your results will lead you to modify your question and go back to step 1.

### target population of a question
- scientific questions have a target population or population of interest which we want to learn something about.

1. what is the average mercury content in swordfish in the Atlantic Ocean?
target population: swordfish in the Atlantic Ocean
2. over the last 5 years, what is the average time to complete a degree for University of Michigan undergraduate students?
population of interest: university of michigan undergraduate students
3. does a new drug reduce the number of deaths in patients with severe heart disease?
population of interest: patients with severe heart disease
4. do genetic variants in the Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) region of the human genome influence COVID-19 risk?
for this question, the target population is not specified. it could be the entire US population, or a specific group of people.

sometimes we can collect the entire target population, but usually we cannot.

### sampling from a population

**samples** are collected from the **target population**. **measurements** are taken on **variables** in the selected samples.

explanatory variable (exposure) -- might affect --> response variable (outcome)

a variable can be both an explanatory variable and a response variable:
- stress level (explanatory) might affect smoking status (response)
- smoking status (explanatory) might affect neck cancer (response)

### sampling from a population, cont.

- the sampling method can determine how representative the study sample is of the target population.
- if the sample is a close representation of the population, what we learn in the sample is more likely to be true in the population.
- the study design determines the types of questions that can be addressed and the conclusions that can be drawn.
- the field of stat sis based on the concept that each sample taken from a population will be subtly different due to random sampling.

### types of studies

- **experimental**
    - the investigator controls who in the study population receives the exposure/treatment.
    - exposure is typically randomized among study participants.
    - considered teh gold standard
    - e.g. randomized control trial (RCT)

- **observational**
    - the investigator has no control over the exposure.
    - the investigator collects naturally occurring realizations of the exposure and observes corresponding outcomes.
    - more susceptible to confounding than RCT.
    - why would anyone choose to do an observational study?
    - public health research predominantly deals with observational study designs.

### Comparison table

| Exposure | Outcome | Potential Experimental Strategy | Potential Observational Strategy |
|----------|---------|---------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Smoking  | Lung Cancer | Randomly assign individuals to smoke or not to smoke, see who gets lung cancer | Identify people with and without lung cancer, ask which ones smoked |
| Breast Feeding by mother | Child's IQ level | Randomly assign a set of new mothers to breastfeed and others to bottle feed. Record child IQ later in 5th grade | Collect the IQs of a set of 5th graders at a given school, ask mothers about breast feeding habits |
| Vaccinations | Autism | Randomly assign toddlers to be vaccinated or not at local pediatrician offices, follow-up for autism diagnosis | Chart review of toddler electronic health records, record both vaccination history and autism diagnoses |
| New Exercise Program | Weight Loss | Randomly assign individuals interested in losing weight to new exercise program and others to standard program | Ask people at local gym if they have recently lost weight and whether they used the new exercise program |

Public health research primarily deals with observational study designs. Why?
- many times it is not ethically possible to design fully randomized experiments on human populations.

### simple random samples

- simple random sampling:
every individual in the population is equally likely to be selected for study inclusion.
- a simple random sample is representative of the population (exposures and outcomes).

### simple random samples, cont.

- collecting a true random sample may be difficult, expensive, or scientifically disadvantageous.
- examples: internet enrollment of elderly or impoverished, studying rare diseases.
- inadvertently sampling individuals with certain characteristics with higher probability can lead to *bias*.

- *bias*: results from a subsample that is not representative of the intended target population.
- it is important to understand where your data comes from, how it was collected, and be honest about any potential biases.

### exercise: sampling SPH graduate students

- research question: I am interested in the number of hours UM SPH graduate students spend on homework per week.
- target population: UM SPH graduate students
- Any immediate concerns?
    - depends on how you ask the questions

Is there potential for bias with the following strategies for simple random sampling?
1. recruit students in the SPH library while leaving work on Friday afternoon.
    - might be more hard-working students that are already in the library.
    - might be a different population than students who are in the library on wednesday, or monday.
2. recruit students at an SPH tailgate at a UM football game.
    - some students don't watch football.
    - might be a less international population, might bias towards domestic students.
3. I am in Biostatistics, so much easier for me to just ask them.
    - there are other departments in SPH (nutrition, epidemiology, etc.)
    - might bias towards biostatistics students, who may be categorically different from other students.
4. I run a Poll Everywhere in this class.
    - might bias towards students who are in class on that day
    - some departments might be over-represented and others might be under-represented.
5. I send an email to all students in the SPH directory.

### Example: genes for good

- crowd-sourcing a genetic study
- engage tens of thousands of individuals in genetic research
- study participants are recruited through the Genes for Good Facebook App
- participants receive free genetic information in exchange for answering health-related questions, and can view summaries of selected survey questions
- participant data is used for health research

Results:
- genes for good population sample:
    - ended up being younger than overall US population (median age of 33 v. 44)
    - more women in sample (74%) v. overall US population (51%)
    - genes for good sample was consistent with other larger studies in terms of genotype-BMI association
    - not a random sample, but still useful for research
    - distribution of BMI in genes for good would not reflect US population
    - still accurately reflects BMI genetic associations because the recruitment did not bias that relationship

### NHANES (National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey)

- NHANES is intentionally not a simple random sample
- uses complex, multistage, probability sampling design
- oversampling of certain population subgroups to increase the reliability and precision of health status indicator estimates for these groups (e.g. african americans, >60 years of age)
- sampling weights are assigned to each person in the study to reflect the frequency of their demographic in the overall US population


### cohort study

- cohort studies follow a "group" of people that do not have the outcome at the start of follow-up
- definition of cohort lays out the eligibility requirements for sampling
- sampling based on exposure or demographic or convenience
- could be representative of a desired target population, but not guaranteed

- what for outcomes of interest after the sample is included in the study population
- potentially allows for many different outcomes to be studied in the same group
- importantly, we know the temporal ordering of exposure and outcome
- can be retrospective or prospective: forward-looking or backward-looking in time.


### example: SPH cohort study
- study design for determining incidence of vision impairment in MPH students
- incidence is the rate of individuals with new vision impairment
- determine if all these Zoom meetings are leading to vision problems
- cohort definition: MPH students *without* eyeglasses at enrollment
- outcome: received a new eyeglass prescription during MPH program?
- baseline data: age, sex, prior vision history, prior occupation, family history, avg screen time

### example: Framingham Heart Study
- began in 1948 as a long-term study of common factors or characteristics that contribute to cardiovascular disease
- original cohort had ~5000 men and women from the town of framingham, massachusetts who had not developed overt symptoms of cardiovascular disease or suffered a heart attack or stroke
- recorded massive numbers of potential risk factors
- several cohorts have followed, including offspring
- considered one of the premier prospective cohort studies

Who is the target population?
- in the early years, majority white european sample, but more recent cohorts have reflected changes in racial and ethnic diversity of the town of framingham.

### cross-sectional study
- data collected from different individuals at a single point in time
- investigator observes information without influencing it
- so cross sectional studies are observational
- example: 2020 US census

### case-control study

- study participants are recruited based on the outcome of interest
- the ratio of cases to controls in the case-control sample is not intended to be the same as that in the target population
- cases are over-sampled to provide a more powerful statistical analysis
- 


<!-- STUDY DESIGNS
BIOSTATISTICS 521: APPLIED BIOSTATISTICS
Instructor: Xiang Zhou
A Brief Introduction to Study Designs
Big Picture:
Once you have your scientific hypothesis, you need to collect data to test your hypothesis.
Where does the data come from? You might design your own study and collect your own data. Or
perhaps you will use publicly available data.
Regardless, every study has a specific design in which samples are recruited and data is collected.
That process determines the types of questions that can be addressed and the types of data you
receive.
In this lecture, we will first look at some classic study designs and determine the design used in
recent publications.
Study Design however is an entire course of its own and this is just an introduction to a very broad
field.
2
3
Develop a
Scientific
Question
Collect Data
Analyze Data
Make Conclusions
about Scientific
Question
The
Research
Process *
* Highly Simplified
4
Develop a
Scientific
Question
Collect Data
Analyze Data
Make Conclusions
about Scientific
Question
The
Research
Process *
* Highly Simplified
Where will the data come from?
What data should I collect?
The study design dictates the type of data
that will be analyzed and the scientific
questions that can be asked
Target Population of a Question
Scientific questions have a target population or population of interest which we want to learn
something about.
1. What is the average mercury content in swordfish in the Atlantic Ocean?
2. Over the last 5 years, what is the average time to complete a degree for University of
Michigan undergraduate students?
3. Does a new drug reduce the number of deaths in patients with severe heart disease?
4. Do genetic variants in the Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) region of the human
genome influence COVID-19 risk?
Sometimes we can collect the entire target population. Usually we cannot.
5
Sampling from a Population
6
Samples are collected from the target
population and measurements are taken on
variables in the selected samples
A variable can be both an explanatory variable
and a response variable:
(exposure) (outcome)
Stress Level Smoking Status
Smoking Status Neck Cancer
Sampling from a Population
• The method by which samples are collected determines how representative the study sample is
of the target population.
• If the sample is a close representation of the population, what we learn in the sample is more
likely to be true in the population.
7
• The mechanism or study design by which data
is collected determines the types of questions
that can be addressed and the conclusions that
can be drawn
• The field of statistics is based on the concept
that each sample taken from a populations will
be subtly different due to random sampling
8
Experimental Observational
(exposure) (outcome)
• The investigator controls who in the study
population receives the exposure
• The exposure is typically randomized among
study participants
• Considered the “gold standard” study design
Randomized Control Trial (RCT)
• The investigator has no controls over the exposure
• Investigator collects naturally occurring realizations of
the exposure and “observes” corresponding outcomes
• More susceptible to confounding than RCT
• Why would anyone choose to do an observational study?
Observational vs Experimental Study Designs
Public Health research predominantly deals with observational study designs. Why?
9
Potential Observational StrategyPotential Experimental StrategyOutcomeExposure
Identify people with and without lung cancer,
ask which ones smoked
Randomly assign individuals to smoke or
to not smoke, see who gets lung cancer
Lung CancerSmoking
Collect the IQs of a set of 5th graders at a given
school, ask mothers about breast feeding habits
Randomly assign a set of new mothers to
breastfeed and others to bottle feed.
Record child IQ later in at 5th grade.
Child’s IQ LevelBreast Feeding
by Mother
Chart review of toddler electronic health
records, record both vaccination history and
autism diagnoses
Randomly assign toddlers to be
vaccinated or not at local pediatrician
offices, follow-up for autism diagnosis
AutismVaccinations
Ask people at local gym if they have recently lost
weight and whether they used the new exercise
program
Randomly assign individuals interested in
losing weight to new exercise program
and others to standard program
Weight LossNew Exercise
Program
Simple Random Samples
10
Population
Simple random sampling
Every individual in the population is
equally likely to be selected for study
inclusion
A simple random sample is
representative of the population
(exposures and outcomes)
A Simple
Random
Sample
Simple Random Samples
11
Population
Simple random sampling
Every individual in the population is
equally likely to be selected for study
inclusion
A simple random sample is
representative of the population
(exposures and outcomes)
Each simple random sample varies
somewhat due to chance
(sampling variation)
Simple Random Samples
• Collecting a true simple random sample from a population can be difficult or
scientifically disadvantageous
• Examples: Internet enrollment of elderly or impoverished, studying rare diseases
• Inadvertently sampling individuals with certain characteristics with higher probability
can lead to bias
• Bias is when results from a subsample are not representative of the intended target
population
• It is always important to understand where your data comes from, how it was collected,
be honest about any potential biases
• Examples: internet enrollment; case-control study of rare disease
12
Exercise: Sampling SPH Graduate Students
• Suppose I am interested in the number of hours UM SPH graduate students spend on
homework per week.
• What is my target population? Any immediate concerns?
Any potential for bias with the following strategies simple random sampling?
• I recruit students in the SPH library while leaving work on Friday afternoon.
• I recruit students at an SPH tailgate at a UM football game.
• I am in Biostatistics, so much easier for me to just ask them.
• I run a Poll Everywhere in this class.
• I send an email to all students in the SPH directory.
13
https://genesforgood.sph.umich.edu/
• Crowd-sourcing a genetic study
• Engage tens of thousands of individuals
in genetic research
• Study participants are recruited through the
Genes for Good Facebook App
• Participants receive free genetic information in
exchange for answering health-related
questions, and can view summaries of
selected survey questions
• Participant data is used for health research
14
Nationwide Distribution of
Genes for Good Participants
Gonçalo Abecasis (PI)
15
a Based on all valid GfG responses as of August 9th, 2017
b Data for U.S. population from the 2010 U.S. Census
c Data for Facebook population from Statistica
d Median age of U.S. persons over age 18 reported in the Census
True simple random samples can be
logistically hard to collect
Is the Genes for Good data biased?
• Bias depends on what your
intended target population is.
Is this data useful for research?
• Utility depends on the question of
interest
16
Consistent estimates of
genotype-BMI
association between
Genes for Good dataset
and previous large
genetic study
Comparison of Effect Estimates for known BMI genetic variants
between Genes for Good (GfG) and a large genetic study (Locke et al)
It depends on the question!
17
Genes for Good dataset is not a simple random sample of the US population
 Distribution of BMI in GfG would not reflect US population
 Still accurately reflects BMI genetic associations because the recruitment did not bias that
relationship
Datasets that are not simple random samples can still be very valuable,
just make sure you are asking appropriate questions.
Sometimes sampling is intentionally non-random…
The National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey
18
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes/participant/participant-selected.htm
NHANES is intentionally not a simple random
sample:
• Complex, multistage, probability sampling design
• Oversampling of certain population subgroups to
increase the reliability and precision of health
status indicator estimates for these groups
(e.g. African Americans, >60 years of age)
• Sampling weights are assigned to each person in
the study to reflect the frequency of their
demographic in the overall US population
• Sampling weights are beyond the scope of this
course. We are ignoring them for the labs, but you
should know they exist
Cohort Study
• Cohort studies follow a “group” of people that do not have the outcome at start of follow-up
• A cohort definition lays out the eligibility requirements for sampling
• Sampling could be based on a specific exposure, demographic or even convenience
• Could be representative of a desired target population, but not guaranteed
 Determined by cohort definition
• Watch for outcome(s) of interest after the sample is included in study population
• Potentially allows for many different outcomes to be studied in the same group
 Importantly we know the temporal ordering of exposure and outcome
19
Cohort Study
• Cohort Studies can be retrospective or prospective
• Prospective: recruit now and watch for onset of disease in the future
• Retrospective: go “back in time” to select for study based on an exposure and/or being disease-
free at the start of defined follow-up time 20
Population
Cohort Sample Disease Status
Determined During
Follow-up
Enrollment:
Cohort
Definition
Example: SPH Cohort Study
Study design for determining incidence of vision impairment in MPH
students
• Incidence is the rate of individuals with new vision impairment
• Determine if all these Zoom meetings are leading to vision problems
21
Start of
Followup
End of
Followup
Year 0 1 2
• Cohort Definition: MPH students without eyeglasses at
enrollment
• Baseline data: age, sex, prior vision history, prior
occupation, family history, avg screen time
• Outcome: Received a new
eyeglass prescription during
MPH program?
22
Start of
Followup
End of
Followup
Identify cohort here.
Collect baseline data immediately. Collect vision outcome here
Prospective Cohort Design
Start of
Followup
End of
Followup
Identify cohort here based on
criteria at start of followup.
Collect baseline data
and vision outcome.Retrospective Cohort Design
Example: SPH Cohort Study
23
Study design for incidence of vision impairment in MPH students
Retrospective and prospective design produce the same data “in theory”
Various considerations for each design can affect data collection:
• Dropout of study participants (Whom did we lose and why?)
• Recall error/bias of baseline data for retrospective (what was my screen time at the start?)
• Accuracy of retrospective cohort definition (did everyone have normal vision initially?)
• Cost of follow-up for prospective design
• Waiting time until availability of data for prospective design
24https://www.framinghamheartstudy.org/
• FHS was begun in 1948 as a long-term study of common factors or characteristics that contribute to
cardiovascular disease
• Original Cohort of 5,209 men and women between the ages of 30 and 62 from the town of
Framingham, Massachusetts, who had not yet developed overt symptoms of cardiovascular disease
or suffered a heart attack or stroke.
• Recorded massive numbers of potential risk factors (added genetics later)
• Several cohorts have followed, including offspring
• Considered one of the premier prospective cohort studies (longitudinal)
• Who is the target population?
 Initial cohorts predominately white European, recent cohort recruitment has reflected recent
changes in racial and ethnic diversity of the town of Framingham.
Cross-Sectional Study
• A research design in which data are collected from different individuals at a single
point in time
• In a cross-sectional study, the investigator observes information (variables)
without influencing them
• So cross sectional studies are observational
• Example: 2020 US census
25
Case – Control Study
• Study participants are recruited based on the outcome of interest
• The ratio of cases to controls in the Case-Control Sample is not intended to be the same as that in
the target population.
26
Target
Population
Case-Control
Study Sample
• Cases are typically over-sampled to provide a
more a “powerful” statistical analysis, that is,
a better chance of identifying a true
association between the exposure and the
outcome
• Case-control studies are retrospective
o Order of exposure and outcome onset is
often unknown, limiting interpretation
of causality
What do you think?
A study of which of the following diseases would benefit (most) from a case-control
study compared to a simple random sample?
• Obesity?
• Hypertension?
• Diabetes?
• Cystic Fibrosis (CF)?
27
What do you think?
Disease prevalence is the proportion of individuals in the population who have the
disease at a given time.
If you wish to estimate prevalence of cardiovascular disease in the US population,
which sampling design(s) could you use?
• Case-control study?
• Cohort study?
• Simple random sample?
• Experimental study?
Does your answer change if you wish to estimate prevalence for CF?
28
The Hierarchy of Evidence
29
Why so many study designs?
 The ability of a study design to minimize the effect
of confounders and confirm the temporal ordering of
exposure and outcome determines it evidence for
causation (rather than just association or correlation)
 Different study designs are ideal for addressing
different scientific questions:
• Prevalence -> cross-sectional studies/ random
sample
• Incidence -> cohort studies
• Associations -> case-control
• Causation -> cohort, randomized
 Study Designs differ dramatically in their cost, time
and logistics to implement
 Always a trade-off of cost vs. evidence
Increasing
evidence of
causation
Identifying Study Design While Reading
Research Papers
• When reading a research paper, make it a habit to quickly determine the study
design the authors used
• Evaluate if the study design is valid to address the scientific question being
addressed? Is it ideal?
• Have the authors collected data on risk factors besides the exposure of interest
that could distort (confound) the results?
• Determine the study design, the target population, primary outcomes and
exposures
Should be able to quickly determine this information from abstract
30
31
• Target Population: Public Health Doctoral Recipients, 2003 - 2015
• Primary Outcome of Interest: Employment status and type
• Exposures: Age, sex, race, children, field of study, institution
• Study Design Type: Simple random sample (90% response rate, why so high?), Cross-
sectional = data sampled at one point in time
32
• Target Population:
Opioid “naïve” surgical patients
• Primary Outcome of Interest:
New persistent opioid dependence
• Exposures: surgical type, prior
behavioral or pain disorders
• Study Design Type:
Retrospective Cohort pulled from
insurance claims data: US adults 18 to 64
years old, opioid naïve 12 months to 1
month prior to surgery
33
Target Population: College-aged students
who exercise
Primary Outcome of Interest: Choice of
post-workout snack (apple, brownie,
neither)
Exposure: Time of making the decision,
age, sex, BMI, workout duration, etc
Study Design Type: Convenience-based
random sample (students entering Rec
Center), with pseudo-random assignment
of exposure. For logistical purposes, one
condition, “before” or “after”, was
implemented per study day.)
34
Target Population: Adults with High Allergy Risk
(algorithmic risk assessment based on
questionaire)
Primary Outcome of Interest: Allergic and
anaphylactic reactions after first and second
doses
Exposure: Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine
Study Design Type: Prospective cohort study
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamanetworkopen/fullarticle/2783626
35
Making use of accidental exposure:
On March 13th, 2005, venison from a CWD infected
deer was unintentionally served to individuals at
the annual Sportsmen's Feast in Oneida County,
New York.
• Target Population: Venison eating population
• Primary Outcome of Interest: Any health
repercussions?
• Exposures: Consumption of CWD-positive
venison
• Study Design Type: Prospective cohort
(longitudinal): inclusion criteria was eating
CWD venison
The study population will be monitored
continuously throughout their lifetimes for a wide
range of sensory and psychiatric/behavioral
symptoms.
Summary
• Population and sample
• Choose study design that can efficiently answer primary research question(s)
• Experimental and observational studies
• Study designs: experiment, case-control, cohort, cross sectional, longitudinal •
Retrospective and prospective studies
• Bias and information
• Association versus causation
• When you evaluate a research paper, look at the study design. Is it appropriate to
answer the research question? What is the intended target population? Any
concerns for bias? 36
Exam 2 Date:
37
Oct 29 (Tuesday) or Oct 31 (Thursday)? -->