## 2024-09-03

### Week 3 Agenda
- defining conflict 
- develop case analysis from your personal life
- defining your values

### Guest Speaker:

- graduated 2009
- joined air force
- data scientist after air force

conflict: executive MBA student at UM
- tuition includes weekend stay on campus hotel
- UM announced closure of campus hotel for renovations
- UM offered to pay for hotel stay at nearby hotel
- students not informed of the change until they arrived on campus
- students upset about the change in plans

Goal: Repair the relationship between the students and the university

Two values that have been violated by this situation:
- value proposition of the program
- Community
- Integrity
- Flexibility

Action steps:
- Townhall meeting
- Meeting with decision-makers
- Community building activities
- Assessment/Negotiation over comparable alternatives
- Changing the value proposition

### Transformative Justice

Conflict: Disagreement, difference, or argument between two or more people. Can be personal, political, or structure. There may be a power difference. 

Harm: The suffering loss, pain and impact that can occur both in conflict and in instances of abuse. 

Misunderstanding: incorrectly interpreting or not understanding what is being communicated. Something that can be resolved through a clarifying conversation.

Mistakes: when someone straight up messes up. Says something offensive or triggering, mishandles a situation, is dishonest, has a negative impact.

### unwelcome/Unwanted behavior

Fran Sepler -- Expert on abuse, sexual misconduct
- developed a continuum of workplace harassment behaviors:

microaggresions < 
boundary slippage < 
hostile words and actions (protected class directed) < 
sexual words and actions < 
unwelcome sexual advances

### Develop your personal case analysis

write a half-page to one-page summary in the google doc of a conflict you were engaged in within your personal and professional life.