To: Johnson 4 America PAC  
From: Francisco Brady, Analyst's R Us  
Subject: Candidate Johnson's Position on Federal Oversight of Local Policing  
Date: 2021-11-17

I. Introduction  
   A. Overview of core beliefs about justice, safety, and reform, alongside the "pattern and practice" concept.  
The Department of Justice (DOJ) has been initiating "Pattern and Practice", or 14141 investigations since the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994. These investigations are usually in response to complaints or as a result of suits brought by local community activist or civil rights groups, which bring to attention practices that may violate the constitution's guarantee to [fourth amendment blah]. These investigations are conducted by the Department of Justice Civil Rights Division. Often they involve interviewing officers and community activists, reviewing documents, and observing police activity. Based on their findings, the DOJ will then issue a report with their assessment of the department. If the DOJ finds a "pattern or practice of discrimination and constitutional violations, they will pursue a consent decree with the police department and the municipality to negotiate the implementation of their recommendations. [add point about DOJ threatening with suits if they can't reach a consent decree]  
   B. Brief history of federal oversight in relation to the evolution of policy.  
During the Trump administration, Attorney General Jeff Sessions released a memo[^1] outlining his key ideas on the practice of 14141 investigations, as well as establishing new requirements such as sign-off from Senior DOJ officials, required sunset dates for consent decrees, and limits on what the DOJ can require of state and city agencies entering into consent decrees.[^2] During Sessions' tenure as Attorney General, Pattern and Practice investigations were de-emphasized, with [^3][cite evidence that investigations were not pursued vigorously.]. After the 2020 election, Joe Biden, appointed Merrick Garland as Attorney General, and the DOJ has since returned to more aggressive investigations of Pattern and Practice violations, [find the number of investigations since Garland's confirmation][^4]. As a serious candidate for President, it is the view of Analyst's R Us that Brandon Johnson should endorse a balanced approach, which emphasizes community involvement in Federal oversight of policing. The rest of the brief is organized as follows: Section II discusses the importance of local autonomy, as well as opportunities for the DOJ to support local efforts at police oversight, leveraging Johnson's unique experience cooperating with the DOJ in implementing and strengthening the Consent Decree in Chicago. Section III delves more specifically into the role that the DOJ can play in this process, and how it can step in to enforce or support reform efforts at a local level, including with development of federal standards for police departments, and Section IV concludes.

II. Balancing Local Autonomy, Federal Oversight, and Police Reform
   A. Assertion of balanced local control, federal scrutiny, with an emphasis on police reform.  
The Johnson campaign should recognize the importance of continuing to pursue investigations into constitutional violations; at the same time, it is important that the campaign stress a departure from the Obama/Biden DOJ agenda. The campaign should emphasize that it will not pursure investigations as it's sole policy tool in the effort towards addressing police misconduct. As a candidate for mayor to run America's third largest city, Brandon Johnson promised to reorient the Chicago Police Department practices to emphasize "Treatment not Trauma", the same motivating principles should shape the campaign's approach to federal oversight of local policing.  
   B. Highlight of the Chicago consent decree's success, advocating for similar nationwide implementation.
      i. Proposal for a collaborative model involving local law enforcement, community organizations, health and addiction services.
During the mayoral campaign, candidate Johnson called for new investments in public safety, mental health, and other public services to address the underlying problems associated with crime and violence. As mayor, Johnson established the Deputy Mayor for Community Safety, to increase coordination across community groups with the police on these issues.[^5] In keeping with this approach, the Johnson campaign should advocate for a collaborative model of federal oversight, offering funding at the local level for initiatives encouraging local law enforcement collaboration with community groups, including those focused on mental health and addiction services, as well as those focused specifically on violence prevention.  
      ii. Emphasis on the importance of community input and oversight.  
The Johnson campaign should rely on the candidate's history as an organizer with the Chicago Teacher's Union to emphasize his support of community input into local issues. In language that will appeal to both liberal and conservative voters, presidential candidate Johnson can voice support for DOJ investigations into the most egregious cases of police misconduct, while at the same time giving strong support to local control and voice to community advocates for violence prevention and other public safety issues.  
   C. Rationale behind local autonomy, federal intervention needs, and the push for extensive police reforms.  
If asked, presidential candidate Johnson can make reference to the strong rationale for encouraging police oversight by Civilian Complain Review Boards (CCRBs), which -- if given sufficient independence and funding-- can result in decreases in police misconduct and violence[^6]. The New Orleans Police Department recorded an almost 40% decrease in Use of Force between 2015 and 2018, after the city entered into a consent decree with the DOJ in 2013[^7]. In order to encourage local acceptance of these boards, the Johnson campaign could commit could increased oversight of police jurisdications that do not have CCRBs or similar community review boards in place.   
IV. Conclusion
   A. Summarizing the balance between local control, federal oversight, reforms, and resource allocation.
   B. Re-emphasizing commitment to safety, justice, fairness, and efficacious policing through these approaches.

[^1]: Full text of the memo here: https://www.justice.gov/media/977521/dl?inline  
[^2]: For more analysis on the impact of the Sessions 
[^3]: Space for reference  
[^4]: Blah blah  
[^5]:  etc
[^6]: Report on CCRBs
[^7]: Hutson, S. (2019, May 30). 2018 Annual Report: Year in Review. Office of the Independent Police Monitor. City of New Orleans.

Pattern or Practice Investigations are precipitated by complaints which may reveal the presence of a pattern or practice of unconstitutional conduct by law enforcement officers in violation of the 4th Amendment.