# 2025-01-21

## Samples, Uncertainty, and Statistical Power, Pt. 2: Statistical Power

### Housekeeping

- PS 1 this week
- Due in 7 days
- work with up to 3 people

### Recap: Estimates differ from estimands due to bias or noise 

In any given study, the goal is to produce an estimand
- best case: and estimand that is **precise** and **unbiased**

### We can quantify precision using hte standard error

$$
Y_i = \gamma_0 + \gamma_1 T_i = u_i
$$

$$
SE[\hat{\gamma_1}] = \sqrt{\frac{Var[\hatu_i]}{(N - k - 1) \cdot Var[T_i)]}}
$$

3 things affect precision
1. variance of unobserved component: $var[\hat{u_i}]$
2. variance of the independent variable: $var[T_i]$
3. the effective sample size: $N - k - 1$

### questions to ask prior to research

1. how many obs do i need to detect an effect
2. what is hte smallest effect i can detect with my sample
3. is there enough variation in my independent variable
4. should i try to collect more data?


### Statistical power

The probability that a study will detect an effect when there is one:

Typically denoted as $(1 - \beta)$
Where $\beta$ is the type II error rate
- think of this as correctly rejecting the null hypothesis when a significant effect exists.

### 2 Main approach to power calc

1. sample size is known but the effect is NOT
    - Determine the smallest $\gamma_1$ such that $(1- \beta) = 0.8$
    - This is the Minimum Detectable Effect size (MDE)
2. MDE is known but the effect is not.
    - Determine the smallest N needed to detect an MDE
    - This is called the required sample size (RSS)

### Ingredients in Power Calcs

1. Sample Size
2. Outcome variance
3. MDE
4. Treatment variance
5. Level at which the outcome and treatment vary

### MDE

- measured same units as outcome variable

1. difference between population mean and null hypothesis
2. difference between two population means 
3. standard effect size, in standard deviation units

$$
SES = \fracP\mu - H_0}{\sigma}
$$

### Choopsing the MDE

1. practically relevant effect sizew -- such as a minimum improvement in outcomes required for the implementing partner to determine whether the programs beneifts are worth the costs of the program.
2. come from published studies evaluating similar interventions

Note: published studies evaluating similar interventions will typically provide an optimistic estimate of a reasonable effect size. (Publication bias)

### interpreting the MDE

Note: Power calcs are based on the underlying sampling distribution of the estimate.
- ecven if a study has 80% power, there is still a 20% chance that you might not detect an effect.

Also note:
- $\alpha$ is concentionally 0.05
- $\beta$ is conventionally 0.80

### Variance of hte independent variable increases the precision

$$
SE[\gamma_i] = \frac{Var[\hat{u_i}]}{(N - k - 1) \cdot Var[T_i]}
$$

- All else equal, $SE[\gamma_i]$ decreases when $Var[T_i]$ increases.

