# 2025-01-16

## Main points
- what is RD
- how to estimate RD models in practice
    - choices: functional form, bandwidth, etc

Issues: Zimmerman 2014

- what is the counterfactual
- bunching at the threshold
- drawbacks of state admin data

## practices of good research
first:
- clear statement of the research question
- theory that will frame that effort

then:
- define population of interest
- representative sample from the population
- measure key variables (valid, reliable)
    - outcome variable
    - treatment variables
    - controls variables
    
- How is the treatment variable determined?

## Causal Inference
- "The researcher must be able to discount all other plausible explanations -- other than the anticipated causal one -- for the link observed between the hypothetical cause and effect"  

Terms:
- assignment to treatment is typically endogenous -- treatment is a result of actions
- exogenous -- assignment of participants to treatment is not determined by participants within the system.

## returns to college 

- estimating the effect of a college degree:
$$
outcome_i = \alpha + \beta Degree_i + \epsilon_i
$$

where:
- outcome: some later life outcome for person i
- degree: indicates whether person i earned a college degree
- $\beta$: difference in earnings between people with and without a college degree


## naive correlation may be biased

example:
- relationship between earnings and education over a whole group
- may be different for high SAT vs. low SAT groups

RD gives us a way to control for each of those. 

## Two Key Questions

1. How is treatment "assigned"? What drives the variable in treatment? 

2. What is the counterfactual? What sort of "treatment" does the control group receive? 

## RD intro
- regression discontinuity (RD) design is a powerful and widely applicable identification strategy

- Setup: treatment is assigned on the basis of one variable (called the assignment or rating or running or score or forcing variable)
    - if value falls on one side of the cutoff, person is assigned to treatment group.
    - if value falls on the other side, person is assigned to the comparison or control group.
    - compare outcome across two groups
    
## Hoekstra - Earnings effect of going to a flagship university

- context: if you got above a specific SAT score, you were automatically admitted into the flagship university.
- RD estimates 38% increase in enrollment probability across the threshold
- This translates to a ~10% difference in average earnings 15 years after high school


## Implementation
Why not just compare right at the cutoff? 
- often impractical due to small exactly at the cutoff
- poor statistical power, would be noisy

- instead use observations *around* the cutoff
    - only use observations within a specific bandwidth of the threshold
     -control for a smooth function of score
     - the identifying variation in the treatment is at the discontinuity
     
 ## Implementation
 
Regress outcome on treatment and a function of the score:
- $ y = \beta treatment + f(score) + \epsilon$
- $\beta$ = effect of treatment on Y

- Usually want this function to vary between treated and non-treated
$$
Y = \beta treatment + f_1(score)*(score<0) + f_2(score)*(score>=0) + \epsilon$
$$

## Sharp v. Fuzzy RD

- Sharp: Prob. of Treatment goes from 0 to 1 as assignment variable crosses threshold.
- Fuzzy: Prob. of Treatment increases discontinuously as assignment variable crosses the threshold.

## Implementation: Fuzzy

- Regress outcome on score and dummy:
$y = \alpha_!*(score>=0) + f_1 (score)*(score<0) + f_2 (score)*(score>=0) + \epsilon$

- Regress treatment on score and dummy -- "First Stage"
$Pr(treatment) = \delta_1*(score=0) + g_1(score)*(score<0) = g_2(score)*(score>=0) + \epsilon$

    - $g_1$ and $g_2$ are smooth functions below and above the cutoff and $\delta$ is the discontinuous jump in Pr(T) at the cutoff.
    
- The effect of treatment on Y is: $\beta = \frac{\alpha}{\delta}}$  
($\delta = 1$ in a sharp RD)

## Hoekstra 2009 v. Zimmerman 2014

- Hoekstra doesn't know admission decisions
    - only estimating flagship enrollment
- Zimmerman has all statewide

## Zimmerman 2014

Research question: What is the effect of going to a 4-year college in Florida

- Data:
    - admin data from Florida
    - secondary school GPAs, demographics
    - state universities: applications, acceptances, adjusted HS GPA, enrollment, degree completion
    - labor market: quarterly earnings if work in the state of FL
    
Pros:
- large number of observations

Cons:
- no labor market data for people who move out of state

## RD Assumptions

1. Threshold crossing increases the likelihood of treatment (easy, verifiable)
2. Treatment assignment is "as good as random" at the threshold
    - students on either side of the threshold are otherwise identical on observable and unobservable attributes related to the outcome)
        - no sorting or manipulation around the cutoff
        - no other policies or treatment at the same cutoff
3. monotonicity - no individuals that are admitted if and only if they have grades below the cutoff.

## Test 1: Smooth density
- No bunching at the threshold
- plot the share of density of observations along the running variable

## Test 2: Continuity of baseline covariates

- Show how much variation across the threshold
- Want to see no bunching across 

## First Stage
- Effect of crossing the threshold on some outcomes:
    - admission into FIU
    - Attendance
    - Any State Univ. Attendance
    - Years attending any State Univ.
    




