## 2025-01-28

### Methodological Issues

Papers:
- Castleman, Long 2016: Looking beyond enrollment: The causal effect of need-based grants on college access, persistence, and graduation.” Journal of Labor Economics, 34(4): 1023–1073

- Denning, J., B. Marx, and L. Turner, 2019. ProPelled: The Effects of Grants on Graduation, Earnings, and Welfare, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, vol 11(3), pages 193-224. [US, RD]
- Fack, Gabrielle and Julien Grenet, 2015. "Improving College Access and Success for Low-Income Students: Evidence from a Large Need-Based Grant Program" American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2015, 7(2): 1-34.
[France, RD]

#### More RD

- Dynamics:
    - outcomes that compound over time -- ITT vs. TOT
    - treatments that recur over time


### Variation in Higher ed funding

- lots of variation across the world in how higher ed is funded
- US spends ~2.5% of GDP on tertiary edu funding, OECD average is ~1.5%

### Who should pay and how

Four options:
1. little govt involvement --> high prices
2. sticker price is low/zero --> gov't pays for it via general taxation
3. sticker price is high/grants --> govt provides grant aid to offset prices
4. sticker price is high/loans --> gov't provides access to loans (subsidized, automatic)

### Sticker price increasing(?)

- sticker price historically increased, but has been declining
- for CC net tuition is $0 on average
- grants offset much of the price increases

### Types of student aid

- grants:
    - federal: pell, targeted at low income ($28bn)
    - states
    - institutional (school tuition discounts)
    - foundations
- tax credits ($11bn)
- loans
    - depending on loan, has subsidy value throuh forgiveness of interest or principal

### How does aid affect schooling decisions?

$$
S_i = \alpha + \beta Aid_i + \chi X_i \epsilon
$$

Challenges to estimating the effect of aid:  
- aid might be conditional on academic outcomes (positive bias)
- students from low income backgrounds might be less likely to complete or do well, which may affect estimates of impact

### Castleman, Long 2016

Research Question: What is the impact of additional aid on enrollment, credits, completion?

Note: Novel contribution of the effect of *additional* aid, not a situation where there is an option of aid/no aid.

### Setting

- Many states have need-based and merit-based grant progrzMs
- florida:
    - pell grant (federal): need based
    - FSAG: need-based
    - bright futures: need-based

### Grant eligibility

- Students with EFC of 0-3100 eligible for pell grants
- FSAG grant based on need for EFCs below 1590
- Two tiers of merit-based (BF) scholarship

### Data

- Admin data from Florida (similar to Zimmerman)
    - Secondary school: transcripts, demographic
    - Financial aid application/received: from FAFSA
    - Postsecondary outcomes: enrollment, courses, majors, completion, private university enrollment.

### Sample

- Seniors in FL 1999-2000
- Must have filled out FAFSA
    - May not effect internal validity -- sample would only apply to low income students with sufficient know-how and/or sufficient support to complete the FAFSA.
    - External validity: estimates not generalizable to students who do not apply to FAFSA, such as students who do not intend to enroll or high income students who don't apply for FAFSA.

### Method: RD

- EFC determines FSAG eligibility
    - Threshold: $1590

- Key equation of interest:
$$
College_ij = \beta_0 + \beta_1 EFC_ij + \beta_3 (FSAG_ij \times EFC_ij) + \gamma ACAD_ij + \delta DEMOG_ij + \rho SCHOOL_ij + \epsilon_ij
$$

Where FSAG = 1 if EFC <= 1590, and 0 if > 1590

### Identification

- What is the single biggest potential source of bias in this setting?
    - Manipulation around EFC threshold
    - Out-of-state students do not show up in the data
    - General idea: Does treatment induce people into the sample in some way?

- What have authors done to try to address?
    - Difficult for people to know enough about EFC calculation -- can rule out manipulation.
    - Run a small DiD and find that FSAG doesn't meaningfully impact enrollment into out-of-state for the sample.


- Are there any sources of bias they're not able to rule out? 

### ITT v. TOT

- Authors focus on ITT (intent-to-treat) effect of financial aid rather than TOT (treatment-on-treated)

- ITT: Effect of FSAG **eligibility** on outcomes
- TOT: Effect of **receiving** FSAG on outcomes

Why?
    - Econometric reason: FSAG is conditional upon enrollment, enrollment itself is affected by treatment.

### How to choose bandwith?

- Tradeoff between variance and bias
    - smaller bandwidth: less specification error/bias, larger standard errors
    - larger: increased error/bias, smaller errors
    - "optimal bandwidth" minimizes mean squared error
- local linear is beomcing conventional
    - RD treatment effect is difference in predicted outcomes on either side of the cutoff
    - often gives more weight to observations closer to the cutoff
- packages available to help you choose bandwidth: rdrobust.github.io

### First Stage

- Not everyone gets full FSAG amount

#### Magnitudes:
- FASG was renewable conditional on eligibility and GPA
- should we think of this as the effect by 4-5 years to get the full additional aid? 
    - NO!
- Turns out this grant only increases student's aid for the first year.

